DATASHEET

Product Features
•  Accelerates the deployment and 
reduces the risk of implementing 
virtualized I/O-intensive 
business-critical applications 
such as Oracle, SAP, DB2, SQL, 
and Exchange 

•  Reduces time spent on problem 
resolution with early detection of 
I/O performance bottlenecks and 
transmission faults

•  Lowers overall downtime by 

generating predictive data on 
potential virtual infrastructure 
problems

•  Improves virtualized application 

performance by enabling 
administrators to optimally 
balance virtualized workloads 
based on I/O response time and 
utilization data, not just CPU and 
memory utilization

•  Lowers overall operating 

expenses and capital expenses 
through ESX server modeling 
and higher utilization of existing 
server/SAN assets 

VirtualWisdom® 
Virtual Server Probe
Model ProbeVM
 
VirtualWisdom provides diagnosis and prevention 
capabilities for complex, virtualized infrastructures 
running mission-critical applications

The  Virtual  Server  Probe  enables  comprehensive,  cross-domain  real-
time  measurement  capabilities that  allow  IT  managers to  optimize the 
performance, utilization, and availability of their virtualized IT infrastructure. 
The Virtual Server Probe adds deep SAN I/O intelligence and operational 
visibility  into  VMware  deployments,  enabling  administrators  to  model 
ESX / ESXi server performance and better balance the deployment of 
virtual machines based on real-time measurements and feedback of I/O 
performance. The Virtual Server Probe is unique in its ability to eliminate 
the risk of using virtualization with I/O-intensive Tier 1 applications such 
as VDI (Virtual Desktop Infrastructure) and those based on Oracle®, IBM 
DB2®, Microsoft SQL Server® or SAP®. 

Use of VirtualWisdom and the Virtual Server Probe results in significantly 
higher  virtual  infrastructure  utilization  and  helps  server  and  VMware 
administrators reduce capital and operational expenses associated with 
an IT organization’s servers and storage. Unlike most server and storage 
vendor-supplied tools that only look at their own devices, VirtualWisdom 
looks  across  all  devices:  servers,  host  bus  adapters  (HBAs),  switches, 
cables, and storage to optimize application performance and the overall 
utilization of the IT infrastructure.

Virtualization has been heavily deployed in nearly every large enterprise 
across nearly every industry to lower both capital and operating costs 
associated  with  server  infrastructure.  Most  use  of  virtualization  today 
has  been  associated  with test,  development,  file  serving,  web  serving, 
or  other  non-business-critical  production  workloads.  Unfortunately, 
virtualization of mission-critical Tier 1 applications has been minimal to 
non-existent due to fears of performance bottlenecks and the inability 
to quickly identify and resolve I/O problems associated with virtualized 
I/O-intensive  applications  or  VDI.  VMware  states  that  over  80%  of 
performance  problems  experienced  by their  users  are  I/O  related, yet 
VMware  software  has  no VM to  LUN view  of  SAN  I/O traffic  patterns.  
VirtualWisdom  does.  A  recent  Forrester  study  found  that  “Maintaining 
High Performance” was the number one challenge related to storage for 
virtual server environments.

Product Features
•  Agent-less architecture enables 
quick deployment with real-time 
monitoring of virtual machines, 
physical servers, and clusters

•  Collects data on and calculates 
120+ different metrics including 
CPU utilization and status, 
memory utilization, disk I/O 
requests and capacity, network 
requests and utilization

•  Enables monitoring, modeling, 

and optimization of VMware 
vMotion and Distributed 
Resource Scheduler for 
performance and availability 
based on historical data and 
trends

•  User definable data collection 

frequency from VMware vCenter 
– as low as every 20 seconds 

•  Policy-based event notifications
•  Simple dashboard-view of virtual 
to physical server I/O from server 
to storage arrays with drill-
down reports for quick problem 
resolution

•  Simple installation into any 

VMware virtualized environment 

Given that close to 75% of all VMware deployments are connected to a 
Fibre Channel SAN, understanding SAN I/O traffic is essential to optimizing 
the performance, utilization and availability of virtualized mission-critical 
applications. Only with Virtual Instruments’ VirtualWisdom and the Virtual 
Server Probe can IT gain this understanding.

The  Virtual  Server  Probe  collects  information  specifically  about  the 
utilization  and  performance  of  virtual  machines  within  the  VMware 
environment  via  the VMware  vCenter  server  API. VirtualWisdom  is  the 
perfect complement to vCenter as it correlates the vCenter information 
from the Virtual Server Probe in real-time with actual I/O performance data 
measured  by  the Virtual  Instruments  SAN  Performance  Probe  directly 
from the SAN infrastructure. Actual measured data from VirtualWisdom 
enables  IT  managers  to  proactively  balance  the  provisioning  of 
applications on virtual machines for maximum application performance 
with  the  confidence  that  systems  will  not  slow  down  or  fail. This  high 
level  of virtual  I/O visibility  makes  risk-mitigated  optimization  and  ESX 
/ ESXi server performance modeling possible, enabling mission-critical 
deployment of virtualized applications possible by verifying Service Level 
Agreement (SLA) metrics in real-time.

Virtual Server ProbeVM

Servers & VMs

VirtualWisdom Server

SAN Availabilty ProbeSW

FC Switch Fabric

SANInsight® TAP Patch Panels

SAN Performance ProbeFC8-HD48

SAN Performance ProbeFC8-HD

AND/OR

SAN Performance ProbeFC8

Storage Arrays

The VirtualWisdom Virtual Server Probe is a virtual software probe that 
automatically discovers and monitors 120+ CPU, memory, network and 
disk I/O metrics for VMware ESX / ESXi virtual machines, physical servers, 
and clusters. The Virtual Server Probe is agent-less and can be configured 
using User Definable Correlations (UDCs) and filters to monitor and track 
I/O from any combination of virtual machines or physical servers at any 
time. I/O data from the virtual machines and servers are automatically 
stored  for  historical  purposes  by  the  VirtualWisdom  Server  to  enable 
trend analysis, performance modeling, and policy setting.

The  VirtualWisdom  Server  collects  the  real-time  data  and  correlates 
server, network, and I/O metrics from the Virtual Server Probe, The SAN 
Availability  Probe,  and  the  real-time  SAN  Performance  Probe  into  a 
complete view of the data path between virtual machines and the SAN 
storage. Performance deviations or faults are quickly diagnosed utilizing 
real-time  and  historical  trends  and  reports.  The  number  of  problems 
and time  spent  on  resolving  performance  issues  or  network  faults  are 
systematically and dramatically reduced.

In large VMware environments where the VMware Distributed Resource Scheduler initiates multiple virtual machine 
migrations  or VMware  vMotion  transfers, VirtualWisdom  and  the Virtual  Server  Probe  play  an  important  part  in 
ensuring the effects on business operations are minimal. During a migration of virtual machines from one server to 
another, all data synchronization between the two virtual machines takes place within the SAN. The Virtual Server 
Probe and the SAN Performance Probe monitor these sudden I/O heavy migrations and if thresholds are exceeded, 
policy-based alerts quickly enable administrators to take action if needed to avoid congestion and faults for other 
VMs or applications.

VirtualWisdom’s  configurable  dashboard  provides  a  simple,  customizable  view  of  I/O  from  the  application  on 
the virtual  machine  and  server to the  LUNs  on the  storage  arrays.  Metrics,  fault  warnings  and  policy  deviations 
are continually updated with quick drill-down reports. SNMP traps can be configured on nearly all of the leading 
management platforms to receive alarms from VirtualWisdom to ensure maximum performance on mission-critical 
applications. Finally, alarms can be configured within VirtualWisdom to e-mail reports triggered by an alarm.

The Metrics Collected or Generated

Calculated Network Virtual Machine Metrics
Disk IO Utilization % - The average Disk IO Utilization 
percentage of total Server HBA capacity. Calculation 
is Avg Disk Usage / Server HBA Capacity where:

•   Avg Disk Usage = Disk Read 

Rate + Disk Write Rate

•   Total HBA Link Capacity = Sum of 

HBA Link Rates from HBA ports
Network Utilization % - The average 
Network Utilization percentage of total 
Server NIC capacity. Calculation is Avg Net 
Usage / Total NIC Capacity where:

•   Avg Network Data Rate = Network Data 

Transmit Rate + Network Data Receive Rate

•   Total NIC Capacity = Sum of NIC 

Speeds from NIC card Ports

Composite Utilization % - A combination index 
that shows the average percentage of total Server 
capacity for four dimensions of resource usage 
including CPU, Memory, Disk IO, and Network. 
Calculation is (Disk IO Utilization % + Network 
Utilization % + CPU Usage % + Memory Usage %) / 4

Max Composite Utilization % - The maximum 
total Server capacity resource observed for the 
four dimensions of resource usage including 
CPU, Memory, Disk IO and Network. Calculation 
is Max (Disk IO Utilization, Network Utilization 
%, CPU Usage %, Memory Usage %)

Context Virtual Machine Metrics
Virtual Machine: The name of the 
Virtual Machine being measured.

Server: The name of the Server being measured.

Cluster: The name of the Cluster being measured

Total HBA Link Capacity (Gb/s): The total 
Host Bus Adapter link capacity (Gb/s). This 
is used to calculate Disk IO Utilization %.

Total NIC Capacity (Mb/s): The total Network 
Interface Card Capacity (Mb/s). This is used 
to calculate Network Utilization %.

Disk IO Utilization %: The average Disk IO Utilization 
percentage of total Server HBA capacity

Network Utilization %: The average Network 
Utilization percentage of total Server NIC capacity.

Composite Utilization %: A combination index 
that shows the average percentage of total Server 
capacity for four dimensions of resource usage 
including CPU, Memory, Disk IO, and Network.

Max Composite Utilization %: The maximum 
total Server capacity resource observed for 
the four dimensions of resource usage

CPU Virtual Machine Metrics
CPU Extra (ms): CPU time (ms) that is extra.

CPU Guaranteed (ms): CPU time 
(ms) that is guaranteed.

CPU Ready (ms): CPU time (ms) spent in ready state.

CPU System (ms): CPU time (ms) 
spent on system processes

CPU Usage %: CPU usage as a percentage 
over the collected interval.

CPU Usage (MHz): CPU usage in MHz over the 
collected interval. For hosts this can be represented 
on a per Virtual Machine basis as a stacked graph.

CPU Used (ms): CPU time (ms) that is used.

CPU Wait (ms): CPU time (ms) spent in wait state.

Avg CPU Active % (5 min.): CPU 
active average % over 5 minute

Max CPU Active % (5 min.): CPU active peak 
over 5 minute Max CPU Throttled % (5 min.): 
Amount of CPU resources over the limit that 
were refused, average over 5 minute

Avg CPU Running % (5 min.): CPU 
running average over 5 minute

Max CPU Running % (5 min.): CPU 
running peak over 5 minute

Memory Virtual Machine Metrics
Memory Active (KB): Amount of memory 
that is actively used (KB).

Memory Consumed (KB): Amount of 
host memory (KB) consumed by the 
virtual machine for guest memory.

Memory Granted (KB): Amount of memory (KB) 
granted. For hosts this can be represented on a 
per Virtual Machine basis as a stacked graph.

Memory Overhead (KB): Amount of additional host 
memory (KB) allocated to the virtual machine.

Memory Shared (KB): Amount of 
memory (KB) that is shared.

Memory Swap In (KB): Amount of 
memory (KB) that is swapped in.

Memory Swap Out (KB): Amount of 
memory (KB) that is swapped out.

Memory Swapped (KB): Amount of 
memory (KB) that is swapped.

Memory Swap Target (KB): Amount of 
memory (KB) that can be swapped.

Memory Usage %: Memory usage as percentage 
of total configured or available memory.

Memory Balloon (KB): Amount of memory 
(KB) used by memory control.

Memory Balloon Target (KB): Amount of memory 
(KB) that can be used by memory control.

Memory Zero (KB): Amount of memory 
(KB) that is zeroed out.

Disk Virtual Machine Metrics
Disk Bus Resets: Number of bus resets in the period.

Disk Commands Issued: Number of disk 
commands issued in the period.

Disk Command Aborts: Number of disk 
commands aborted in the period.

Disk Read Requests: Number of 
disk reads in the period.

Disk Write Requests: Number of 
disk writes in the period.

Disk Read Rate (KB/s): Rate of reading 
data from the disk (KB/s).

Disk Usage (KB/s): Aggregated storage performance 
statistics (KB/s). For hosts this can be represented 
on a per Virtual Machine basis as a stacked graph.

Disk Write Rate (KB/s): Rate of 
writing data to the disk (KB/s).

Network Virtual Machine Metrics
Network Packets Received: Number of 
packets received in the period.

Network Packets Transmitted: Number 
of packets transmitted in the period.

Network Data Receive Rate (KB/s): Rate 
at which data is received (KB/s).

Network Data Transmit Rate (KB/s): Rate 
at which data is transmitted (KB/s).

Network Usage (KB/s): Aggregated network 
performance statistics (KB/s). For hosts 
this can be represented on a per Virtual 
Machine basis as a stacked graph.

Other Virtual Machine Metrics
Avg CPU Active (1 min.): CPU active 
average over 1 minute.

Max CPU Active % (1 min.): CPU 
active peak over 1 minute.

Max CPU Throttled % (1 min.): Amount 
of CPU resources over the limit that were 
refused, average over 1 minute.

Avg CPU Running % (1 min.): CPU 

running average over 1 minute.

Max CPU Running % (1 min.): CPU 
running peak over 1 minute.

Group CPU Sample Count: Group CPU sample count.

Group CPU Sample Period (ms): 
Group CPU sample period (ms).

Heartbeat: Number of heartbeats in this period.

Resource CPU Usage (MHz): 
Resource CPU usage (MHz).

Uptime (sec): Total time (sec) 
elapsed since last startup.

Context Server Metrics 
Server: The name of the Server/host being measured. 

Cluster: The name of the Cluster being measured. 

Total HBA Link Capacity (Gb/s): The total 
Host Bus Adapter link capacity (Gb/s). This 
is used to calculate Disk IO Utilization %.

Total NIC Capacity (Mb/s): Network 
Interface Card Speed (Mb/s).

Disk IO Utilization %: The average Disk IO Utilization 
percentage of total Server HBA capacity.

Network Utilization %: The average Network 
Utilization percentage of total Server NIC capacity.

Composite Utilization %: A combination index 
that shows the average percentage of total Server 
capacity for four dimensions of resource usage 
including CPU, Memory, Disk IO, and Network.

Max Composite Utilization %: The maximum 
total Server capacity resource observed for the 
four dimensions of resource usage including 
CPU, Memory, Disk IO, and Network.

CPU Server Metrics
CPU Idle (ms): CPU time (ms) spent in idle state.

CPU Reserved Capacity (MHz): Total CPU capacity 
(MHz) reserved by the virtual machines.

CPU Usage %: CPU usage as a percentage 
over the collected interval.

CPU Usage (MHz): CPU usage (MHz) over the 
collected interval. For hosts this can be represented 
on a per Virtual Machine basis as a stacked graph.

CPU Used (ms): CPU time (ms) that is used

Avg CPU Active % (5 min.): CPU 
active average % over 5 minute

Max CPU Active % (5 min.): CPU active peak 
over 5 minute Max CPU Throttled % (5 min.) 
3 Amount of CPU resources over the limit 
that were refused, average over 5 minute

Avg CPU Running % (5 min.): CPU 
running average over 5 minute

Max CPU Running % (5 min.): CPU 
running peak over 5 minute

Memory Server Metrics
Avg Memory Active (KB): Amount of 
memory (KB) that is actively used.

Avg Memory Granted (KB): Amount of memory 
granted (KB). For hosts this can be represented on 
a per Virtual Machine basis as a stacked graph.

Avg Memory Heap (KB): Amount of 
memory (KB) allocated for heap.

Avg Memory Heap Free (KB): Free 
space in memory heap (KB).

Avg Memory Overhead (KB): Amount of additional 
host memory (KB) allocated to the virtual machine.

Memory Reserved Capacity (KB): Amount of 
memory (KB) reserved by the virtual machines.

Avg Memory Shared (KB): Amount of 
memory (KB) that is shared.

Avg Memory Shared Common (KB): Amount 
of memory (KB) that is shared by common.

Memory State: Memory state.

Avg Memory Swap In (KB): Amount of 
memory (KB) that is swapped in.

Avg Memory Swap Out (KB): Amount of 
memory (KB) that is swapped out.

Avg Memory Swap Used (KB): Amount of 
memory (KB) that is used by swap.

Avg Memory Unreserved (KB): Amount 
of memory (KB) that is unreserved.

Memory Usage %: Memory usage as percentage 
of total configured or available memory.

Avg Memory Zero (KB): Amount of 
memory (KB) that is zeroed out.

Avg Memory Consumed (KB): Amount 
of host memory (KB) consumed by the 
virtual machine for guest memory

Avg Memory Balloon (KB): Amount of 
memory (KB) used by memory control

Disk Virtual Machine Metrics
Disk Bus Resets: Number of bus resets in the period.

Disk Commands Issued: Number of disk 
commands issued in the period.

Disk Command Aborts: Number of disk 
commands aborted in the period.

Avg Physical Device Command Latency (ms): 
The average time (ms) taken to complete 
a command from the physical device.

Avg Physical Device Read Latency (ms): 
The average time (ms) taken to complete 
a read from the physical device.

Avg Physical Device Write Latency (ms): 
The average time (ms) taken to complete 
a write from the physical device.

Avg Kernel Disk Command Latency (ms): 
The average time (ms) spent in ESX 
Server VMKernel per command.

Avg Kernel Disk Read Latency (ms): The average 
time (ms) spent in ESX Server VMKernel per read.

Avg Kernel Disk Write Latency (ms): The average 
time (ms) spent in ESX Server VMKernel per write.

Disk Read Requests: Number of 
disk reads in the period.

Disk Write Requests: Number of 
disk writes in the period.

Avg Queue Command Latency (ms): The 
average time (ms) spent in the ESX Server 
VMKernel queue per command.

Avg Queue Read Latency (ms): The average time (ms) 
spent in the ESX Server VMKernel queue per read.

Avg Queue Write Latency (ms): The average time (ms) 
spent in the ESX Server VMKernel queue per write.

Disk Read Rate (KB/s): Rate of reading 
data from the disk (KB/s).

Avg Disk Command Latency (ms): The average 
amount of time (ms) taken for a command 
from the perspective of a Guest OS. This is 
the sum of Kernel Command Latency and 
Physical Device Command Latency.

Avg Disk Read Latency (ms): The average amount 
of time (ms) taken for a read from the perspective 
of a Guest OS. This is the sum of Kernel Read 
Latency and Physical Device Read Latency.

Avg Disk Write Latency (ms): The average amount 
of time (ms) taken for a write from the perspective 
of a Guest OS. This is the sum of Kernel Write 
Latency and Physical Device Write Latency.

Disk Usage (KB/s): Aggregated storage performance 
statistics (KB/s). For hosts this can be represented 
on a per Virtual Machine basis as a stacked graph.

Disk Write Rate (KB/s): Rate of 
writing data to the disk (KB/s).

Max Disk Command Latency (ms): The highest 
latency value across all disks used by the host

Network Server Metrics
Network Packets Received: Number of 
packets received in the period.

Network Packets Transmitted: Number 
of packets transmitted in the period.

Network Data Receive Rate (KB/s): Rate 
at which data is received (KB/s).

Network Data Transmit Rate (KB/s): Rate 
at which data is transmitted (KB/s).

Network Usage (KB/s): Aggregated network 
performance statistics (KB/s). For hosts 
this can be represented on a per Virtual 
Machine basis as a stacked graph.

Network Receive Packets Dropped: Number 
of receive packets dropped in the period

Network Transmit Packets Dropped: Number 
of transmit packets dropped in the period

Other Server Metrics
Avg Agent Memory Used %: Memory Used as 
percentage of total configured or available memory.

Avg Agent Memory Swap In (KB): Amount 
of memory (KB) that is swapped in.

Avg Agent Memory Swap Out (KB): Amount 
of memory (KB) that is swapped out.

Avg Agent Memory Swap Used (KB): Amount 
of memory (KB) that is used by swap.

Avg CPU Active % (1 min.): CPU 
active average over 1 minute

©2013  Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or servicemarks of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 10/13European Headquarters46 New Broad StreetLondon EC2M 1JHPhone: +44 (0) 203-651-5685Corporate Headquarters25 Metro Drive, San Jose, CA 95110 · USAPhone: 408-579-4000Fax: 408-579-4001Asia Pacific Headquarters8 Cross Street Level 28PWC Building, Singapore 048424Phone: +65 6850-7841Salessales@virtualinstruments.comPhone: 888-522-2557Supportsupport@virtualinstruments.com