DATASHEET

Benefits
•  Dramatically reduces the time 

to identify and resolve SAN-
related problems, reducing 
downtime and improving IT staff 
productivity

•  Highlights over-utilized resources 

to prevent outages and 
performance problems

•  Historical trending analysis 

enables proactive fault 
identification, reducing the 
number of trouble tickets and 
reducing downtime by up to 75%
•  Enables greater data availability 
by proactively finding multi-path 
failures before they affect end 
users.

•  Enables greater throughput by 

finding opportunities to tune the 
use of multi-path links, ISLs, and 
storage virtualizers

•  Reduces overall SAN-related 

capital and operating costs by 
identifying over-provisioned links, 
helping avoid unnecessary future 
expenses. 

VirtualWisdom® 
SAN Availability Probe 
Model ProbeSW
 
Virtual Instruments products provide an 
unprecedented scope of diagnosis and prevention 
capabilities for complex, heterogeneous FC SANs

As a component of the Virtual Instruments’ VirtualWisdom solutions, the 
SAN Availability Probe is a non-agent based software probe that utilizes 
the MIB (management information block) from Fibre Channel switches 
via  SNMP  to  gather  switch  performance  and  link  error  statistics  in  a 
non-intrusive  manner. These  critical  switch  statistics  are  collected  by 
VirtualWisdom’s Server software and presented to the user in an easy to 
use configurable, graphical user interface.

Use  of  VirtualWisdom’s  SAN  Availability  Probe  results  in  significantly 
higher  infrastructure  utilization  and  helps  administrators  substantially 
improve data availability and application performance through correlation 
techniques that help quickly troubleshoot, or even avoid problems. 

The  SAN  Availability  Probe  supports  all  Fibre  Channel  switch 
manufacturers,  creating  a  vendor-agnostic  view  of  switch  port 
performance.  VirtualWisdom  utilizes  the  data  collected  by  the  SAN 
Availability Probe to track switch performance, identify oversubscribed 
resources,  conduct  historical  trending  analysis,  and  quickly  alert 
administrators of link error problems or performance bottlenecks. 

The SAN Availability Probe runs on the VirtualWisdom Server. The Server 
collects continuous real-time data and correlates server, network, and 
I/O metrics from the Probe. Along with the Virtual Server Probe and the 
SAN Performance Probe, the VirtualWisdom server provides a complete 
view of the data path between hosts and/or virtual machines and SAN 
storage. Performance deviations, link errors, and improperly configured 
multi-pathing  are  quickly  diagnosed  utilizing  real-time  and  historical 
trends and reports. The number of problems and time spent on resolving 
performance issues or network faults are systematically and dramatically 
reduced. 

If  more  detailed  performance  analysis  is  needed,  the  SAN  Availability 
Probe  can  be  used  with  the  hardware  based Virtual  Instruments  SAN 
Performance Probe. The Performance Probe is inserted into the network 
using Traffic Access Points (TAPs), so it does not affect the network it’s 
monitoring.  This  full  line  rate  hardware  probe  can  calculate  real-time 
performance  metrics  from the  SAN,  providing the  most  accurate  SAN 
performance statistics by tracking all individual end device conversations.

Features
•  Provides a dedicated, real-time SAN monitoring solution with flexible thresholds and alerts
•  Gathers Switched Fabric Performance Statistics with a non-agent based software probe
•  Provides overall view of fabric health through centralized switch event monitoring
•  Offers vendor-agnostic view of Fibre Channel switch statistics with no impact on switch performance
•  Identifies highly utilized and underutilized ports and links
•  Detects failed multi-pathing and sub-optimized links (passive vs. active multi-pathing)
•   Support for monitoring and measuring virtual fabrics from Cisco: VSAN, NPV, 

FlexAttach and from Brocade: Virtual Fabric, Access Gateway
•  Records & plays back metrics to pinpoint Intermittent Issues
•  Measures exhaustion of Buffer to Buffer Credit to help identify and avoid potential bottlenecks
•  Provides historical performance trending over time and detects degraded Inter-Switch Links 

 
The  VirtualWisdom  Server  Dashboard  is  a  continuous  real-time 
display that provides a correlated view of the SAN infrastructure, 
based on the metrics available from probes. It provides a simple, 
customizable  and  complete  view  of  I/O  from  the  application  on 
the host server and/or Virtual Machine to the LUNs on the storage 
arrays. Metrics, fault warnings and policy deviations are continually 
updated  with  quick  drilldown  reports.  Reports  are  user-definable 
and can easily be exported for use in other management solutions 
to ensure maximum performance on mission-critical applications.

SAN Availability Probe Compaired
Compared to the most common switch fabric management tools, the SAN Availability Probe provides more complete 
trend analysis for capacity planning, a virtually unlimited record & playback of metrics to pinpoint intermittent issues, and 
supports a wider range of vendor devices. More significantly, along with VirtualWisdom’s SAN Performance Probe and 
Virtual Server Probe it provides more robust instrumentation, monitoring, measurement, root cause analysis/correction 
and optimization of the complete SAN infrastructure, from the host server and/or Virtual Machine to Switch Fabric to the 
LUNs on the storage arrays.

Technical Specifications
Metrics collected or generated by the SAN Availability Probe include:

•   Switch Port Information: Worldwide names of attached devices, manufacturers 

of attached devices, link rate, port type, nickname, FCID

•   Switch Metrics: received/transmitted bytes and frames, CRC errors, link 

resets, link failures, loss of signal, loss of sync, Class3 Discards

•  Switch LED: Error state, signal state. Exhaustion of Buffer to Buffer Credit
•  Standards: ProbeV supports SNMP versions 1, 2c, and 3

©2013  Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or servicemarks of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 10/13European Headquarters46 New Broad StreetLondon EC2M 1JHPhone: +44 (0) 203-651-5685Corporate Headquarters25 Metro Drive, San Jose, CA 95110 · USAPhone: 408-579-4000Fax: 408-579-4001Asia Pacific Headquarters8 Cross Street Level 28PWC Building, Singapore 048424Phone: +65 6850-7841Salessales@virtualinstruments.comPhone: 888-522-2557Supportsupport@virtualinstruments.com