DATASHEET

Product Features
•  Real-time, full line rate FC SAN 

traffic monitoring of up to 48 
concurrent SAN ports

•  Detailed I/O performance, health, 

and utilization measurements

•  Transmission, protocol, and 

fabric error detection

•   Port and resource utilization and 

congestion reporting

•  Buffer credit starvation and slow-

draining device detection

•   Out-of-band, vendor-agnostic 

operation

•  Field-reversible airflow and 

replaceable cooling fans

•   Hot-swappable redundant power 

supply modules

•  Remote administration (includes 

firmware maintenance, 
configuration and monitoring)

VirtualWisdom® 
SAN Performance Probe
Model ProbeFC8-HD48

48 port model of industry’s only Fibre Channel
monitoring probes enables comprehensive 
Infrastructure Performance Management

SAN Performance ProbeFC8-HD48

Introduction

The VirtualWisdom 48-port SAN Performance ProbeFC8-HD48 expands
the industry’s first and only real-time, full line rate family of monitoring
solutions for Fibre Channel storage area networks (SANs). Working
completely out-of-band, the SAN Performance Probe analyzes every
Fibre Channel frame on monitored SAN ports and reports hundreds of
metrics every second to provide comprehensive, accurate, and vendor 
agnostic monitoring from the protocol level.

SAN Performance Probe metrics are correlated with those from other
VirtualWisdom Probes, persistently stored, and presented by the
VirtualWisdom Server, providing holistic and timely insight into the
health, utilization, and performance of large-scale, heterogeneous,
open systems-based infrastructures.

VirtualWisdom’s best-in-class capabilities for deriving actionable
insights  from  these  comprehensive  metrics  deliver  tremendous  value 
across the Infrastructure Performance Management domains:

•   Proactive Monitoring. VirtualWisdom provides early identification of 
emergent performance, health, and utilization issues, enabling rapid 
implementation  of  corrective  actions to  improve  performance  and 
availability and reduce operational risk. 

•   Deep Diagnostics. Detailed, time-coherent data helps to identify the 
root  causes  of  even the  most  sporadic  and  complex  performance 
and availability issues, so they can be definitively eliminated.

•   Infrastructure  Optimization.  Comprehensive  insights  into  the  relationships  between  workload,  performance,  and 
utilization that supports the optimal alignment of application demands with infrastructure capabilities—delivering the 
required performance at the lowest cost and highest availability.

•   SLA Management. The ability to measure and report on I/O performance in near real-time enables the implementation 
of true performance-based SLAs, enabling tighter and more transparent alignment between infrastructure, application, 
and line-of-business groups.

Deployment

The SAN Performance Probe is typically deployed on the links between storage ports and next-tier switches, or on
both sides of fabric-based storage virtualizers. Connectivity to the live links is provided by traffic access points (TAPs),
which use passive optical couplers to access the optical signal on both channels of the link. A TAP diverts a small
amount of the optical power on each channel to a full line rate monitoring output for out-of-band access by the SAN
Performance Probe. TAPs certified for compatibility with the SAN Performance Probe are available from both Virtual
Instruments and a growing number of leading physical infrastructure providers.

Monitoring and Metrics

Connected to the TAP monitor ports, the 48-port SAN Performance Probe analyzes all received traffic at the full-duplex 
8Gb line rate. It reports on over 150 metrics per second per port, with details at link, channel, and initiator-target-LUN 
levels. This set of high frequency, highly detailed metrics includes the following:

•   Health. Metrics including CRCs and other frame errors, loss of signal or synchronization, logins and logouts, SCS 
check conditions, discards, and aborts are all monitored to identify transmission, exchange, or fabric-level errors and 
trends.

•   Utilization. The amount and type of traffic on each channel is monitored, providing direct observation of channel- and 
port-level utilizations and the fabric operating state. Metrics can be flexibly aggregated by VirtualWisdom to monitor 
the utilization of backplanes, control processors, and other critical device resources.

•   Performance. The SAN Performance Probe monitors the performance of every SCSI exchange between each unique 
combination of initiator port, target port, and LUN (ITL), calculating metrics by exchange type including completion 
time, time to first response, and size. As with other VirtualWisdom metrics, these performance measurements can be 
flexibly aggregated in user-defined contexts to enable monitoring of total I/O workload, type of I/O, and performance 
by business application, application tier, storage tier, or other logical grouping.

High–Impact Performance Insight

While all three categories of metrics provide valuable insight, the performance metrics are both the most differentiated 
and the most impactful. They are differentiated because no other solution has the ability to measure I/O performance 
across the SAN at comparable levels of frequency and detail. They are impactful because of the increased efficiency and 
effectiveness they drive across the Infrastructure Performance Management domains: 

•   Monitoring.  Performance  metrics  provide  the  most  accurate  and  timely  indicator  into  the  state  of  the  entire 
infrastructure. Utilization or health problems emergent at any level can often be identified in their earliest stages by 
their impact on performance. 

•   Diagnostics. The “3 dimensional” view of the concurrent state of utilization, health, and performance is vitally important 
to root cause diagnostics, especially of multi-faceted problems that may originate in areas of the SAN far removed 
from where their impacts are first observed. 

•   Planning and Analysis. The comprehensive and accurate view combining application I/O workload with infrastructure 
performance and utilization is the fundamental key to better aligning application requirements with the performance 
capabilities, utilization levels, and costs of different tiers and configurations of infrastructure.

Specifications

Connectivity

•   SAN  Link  Interface.  Connectivity  to  the TAP  monitor  outputs  is  provided  via  field-replaceable  small  form  factor 

pluggable plus (SFP+) optical transceivers.

•   SAN Link Capacity. The ProbeFC8-HD48 SAN Performance Probe monitors up to 48 concurrent Fibre Channel SAN 

Links operating at 2/4/8 Gbps speeds. 

 

•   VirtualWisdom Platform Connectivity. The SAN Performance Probe connects to the VirtualWisdom server platform 

via Gigabit Ethernet to transfer calculated SAN metrics for persistent storage, analysis, and display.

Deployment and Serviceability

•   True  appliance  without  physical  or  remote  console  access.  Firmware  maintenance,  device  configuration,  and 

operational monitoring are all performed remotely via VirtualWisdom.

•   Initial configuration and ongoing management are performed through a standard browser interface via a dedicated 

and directly connected Ethernet port (not a networked port).

•   Redundant hot-swappable power supply modules for high availability. 
•  Field-replaceable and -reversible cooling fan modules support both front-to-rear and rear-to-front airflow.

Safety and Emissions Compliance

•  Emissions

• United States: FCC Part 15, Subpart B (Class A Device)
• Canada: ICES 
• Europe: EN 55022
• Korean: KN 22

•  Safety 

• UL/EN/IEC 60950-1

Environmental
•  Temperature

• Operating: +10 to +35° C (50° to +95° F), max gradation 10° per hour 
• Non-Operating: -20 to +80°C, (-4° F to 176° F) max gradation 20°C per hour

•  Humidity

• Operating: 20% to 80% non-condensing, max gradation 20% per hour
• Non-Operating: 5% to 95% non-condensing, max gradation 20% per hour

Mechanical

Height

Width

Depth

Minimum Cable Bend
Radius Allowance

Weight

Rack Mounting

MODEL PROBEFC8-HD48

3.5 in / 8.9 cm (2U)

17.2 in. / 43.7 cm (excluding rack mounting)

28.2 in. / 71.6 cm (excluding front and rear panel projections). Front face projects 
maximum 0.5 in / 1.3 cm from rack rails. Maximum fixed projection from front 
face 0.75 in / 1.9 cm, from rear face 1.0 in / 2.5 cm. Optional cable manager 
projects 4.5 in / 11.4 cm from front face.

4.5 in / 11.4 cm front and 3.5 in / 8.9 cm rear

52 lbs. / 23.6 kg including rack rails and cable management system

Sliding rack rails support 4 post racks with square, round, or tapped holes with 
rail-to-rail depths of 26.5 in / 67.31 cm to 36 in / 91.4 cm. 1U, 24 in / 61 cm 
deep shelf kit available for alternate rack deployments.

Air Flow (cooling)

3 internal fans with reversible air flow. Power supply has separate dedicated fans

Electrical

Input Voltage

Input Frequency

Current Rating

Inrush Current

MODEL PROBEFC8-HD48

100–240V AC

50/60 Hz

7-3 A

60/80 A @ 115/230V (25° C)

Typical Operating Power

750 W (max.)

©2013  Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or servicemarks of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 10/13European Headquarters46 New Broad StreetLondon EC2M 1JHPhone: +44 (0) 203-651-5685Corporate Headquarters25 Metro Drive, San Jose, CA 95110 · USAPhone: 408-579-4000Fax: 408-579-4001Asia Pacific Headquarters8 Cross Street Level 28PWC Building, Singapore 048424Phone: +65 6850-7841Salessales@virtualinstruments.comPhone: 888-522-2557Supportsupport@virtualinstruments.com