SOLUTIONS BRIEF 

VCE™ INTEGRATED SOLUTION FOR CLOUD 
MANAGEMENT WITH VMWARE  

vce.com

Going Beyond Converged Infrastructure 
VCE and Vblock® Systems offer the fastest deployment of 
infrastructure and applications, the highest application 
performance and availability, the lowest TCO, and 
unmatched lifecycle assurance. 

As cloud adoption rates rapidly increase, IT departments  
and service providers look to Vblock Systems as the best 
foundation for providing highly secure, reliable cloud  
services. Important first steps for successful delivery of  
cloud services include 

  Automating, managing, and orchestrating  

Vblock Systems. 

  Finding the right foundational infrastructure and cloud 

management platform for your business.  

  Avoiding the extensive, on-site service integration 
engagements typically required to “stand up” these 
technologies—often leading to project delays, cost 
overruns, and negative customer experiences.  

  Ensuring you can reliably maintain, upgrade, and 
support that environment—to provide a superior 
experience for IT and business users.  

High-Value “Starter” for Private Cloud 
Building on the proven success of VCE™ Vblock System 
converged infrastructure, and with our customers’ challenges 
in mind, VCE is evolving its portfolio to include new  
integrated solutions. 

Jointly developed with VMware, VCE™ Integrated Solution 
for Cloud Management with VMware provides a “starter kit” to 
quickly deliver private cloud services—increasing IT agility 
while reducing complexity and costs. 

The solution pre-integrates VMware vCloud Automation 
Center (vCAC) and related VMware cloud management 
software components on a Vblock System in the VCE factory. 
Backed by its brief on-site configuration services, the solution 
enables you to manage your Vblock System infrastructure 
and deliver infrastructure- or VM-as-a-service about 15 days 
after your Vblock System arrives. Now, you can rapidly 
address the needs of customers by offering catalog-style, 
pre-configured workflows through this integrated solution built 
on VCE proven converged infrastructure and industry-leading 
technology from VMware.  

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

Best of all, you enjoy the signature “VCE Experience”—
including lifecycle assurance and validation for the software, 
plus single-number support.  

A Smooth Onramp to Hybrid Cloud 
Continuing our close collaboration with VMware, VCE is 
enhancing the integrated solution to combine VMware 
vRealize® suite cloud management software into the Vblock 
System, providing a foundational private cloud that is hybrid 
cloud-ready, with the technology to migrate workloads to 
selected “end-points” in the VMware vCloud Air Service. 
These end-points or next-generation clients will supply 
account and credentials for a seamless hybrid cloud 
experience between a Vblock System based private cloud 
and vCloud Air public cloud. 

This enhanced solution will also integrate extensions to 
enable VMware’s DR-as-a-Service. This creates an ideal 
hybrid cloud solution for customer disaster recovery 
requirements by enabling capacity bursting or VM failover for 
a Vblock System based private cloud. 

The VCE and VMware Difference 
The solution provides everything you need to quickly deliver 
foundational cloud services to your customers with 
unmatched simplicity and industry-leading customer 
experience: 

  Best-in-class cloud management software pre-installed 
on a Vblock System 300 family or Vblock System 700 
family 

  Pretesting of all the software components, including 

purpose-built workflows for the Vblock System  

  VMware vCenter Operatons Manager (vCOps) 

integrated with VCE Vision™ Intelligent Operations 
software—a centralized control point for cloud 
provisioning, monitoring, and management  

  Ongoing release validation with VCE™ Support— 
for lifecycle assurance with the “VCE Experience” 

  A proven foundation from which to rapidly develop 

private and hybrid cloud capabilities and deploy  
into production 

 

 

 

Pre-Integrated Cloud Management Software 
Components 
VMware vCloud 
Automation Center 
(vCAC) Advanced 
Edition 

The foundation for self-service 
portal and cloud management 
capabilities orchestrated by 
vCenter Orchestrator (vCO) 
(compute and network) and EMC 
ViPR (storage) provisioning.  
 
Provides a visual representation 
of infrastructure health and 
efficiency.  

Integrated with vCOps to 
to provide compliance checks for 
the Vblock System.  
 
Provides cost and business 
management capabilities within 
the Vblock System. 

VMware vCenter 
Operations 
Management suite 
(vCOps) 
 
VCE VisionTM 
Intelligent Operations 

VMware IT Business 
Management (ITBM) 
suite  

VMware Log Insight  

Provides real-time log 
management and log analysis. 

 

Solution Benefits 
Operational simplicity  
  Get foundational cloud management and orchestration 

capabilities “out-of-the-box” with pre-integrated, pre-
validated VMware software delivered on a Vblock System.  

  Gain centralized visibility keeping IT operations in 

control and knowledgeable of the health and status of 
Vblock System infrastructure and configurations. 

  Free IT staff from mundane manual tasks, allowing them 

to focus on new Vblock System based cloud services. 

  Enjoy full lifecycle assurance (ongoing release 

certification and VCE Support). 

Flexibility 
  Extend the solution to 

o  Implement additional cloud capabilities (such as 
advanced security, business continuity, disaster 
recovery, monitoring, chargeback). 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

o  Create additional or customized workflows. 
o  Integrate with your own existing operational systems 

(i.e. monitoring or ticketing systems). 

  Choose services available via VCE, EMC, VMware, or 

VCE partners. 

Fast time-to-value 
  Gain a reliable cost-effective “entry” cloud with long-

term TCO benefits compared with highly customized, 
time-consuming solutions that are not supportable. 

  Accelerate deployment with embedded VMware- 
developed management and orchestration assets 
specific to Vblock Systems. 

  Reduce VM provisioning time from weeks to minutes 

when compared with many current methods.  

Built For Today’s IT Organizations 
We’ve built the solution to meet vital business demands for 
today’s cloud infrastructure and operations teams. It’s the 
perfect solution whether you need to 

  Rapidly set up on-demand cloud environments for 

test/QA or basic production workloads, with the option to 
“build from there.”  

  Build a simple starting point to optimize effectiveness of 

your operations team. 

  Provide cloud services to external customers with the 

experience they deserve. 

Administrators and internal business customers have 
everything they need for rapid, efficient provisioning: 
  Physical data-center orchestration 

(New/Add/Remove)—Allows the cloud/infrastructure 
administrator to automatically allocate physical Vblock 
Systems resources and bare-metal provisioning.  

  Virtual data-center orchestration 

(New/Add/Remove)—Allows the cloud/infrastructure 
administrator to automatically allocate virtual resources. 

  Virtual machine orchestration 

(New/Add/Modify/Extend Lease/Remove/Archive)—
Allows cloud administrators and end-users to provision 
virtual machines from the VCAC-based service catalog in 
an automated fashion. End-user self-service reduces 
deployment times to minutes.  

  Compliance validation (VCE Vision™ software 

integration)—Compliance check for Vblock System 
including hardening compliance scores. 

 

Extend VCE Experience to Cloud Management 
  Greater Agility—Each VCE Integrated Solution for 

Cloud Management is an extension of the Vblock System 
that is engineered, manufactured, maintained, and 
supported as a single system. The solutions can be 
ordered and delivered within 45 days, with additional 
time-to-value of about 15 days. Vblock Systems are 
deployed by our 150 “Vblock Ready™” global qualified 
partners, giving customers a choice of certified 
professionals that use standardized, proven services. 
This translates into faster time-to-production for projects 
and follow-on activities, and faster time-to-business value.  

  Reduce Complexity and Risk—Every Vblock System 

is pre-engineered and validated in a VCE factory 
environment. This pre-engineering, pre-test, and pre-
validation are applied to VCE Integrated Solutions, 
greatly reducing deployment time and risk.  

  Comprehensive Services—VCE can help you develop 

a cloud computing roadmap, and deploy and integrate 
your systems quickly to ensure operational success. 
Post-deployment, VCE Support proactively identifies 
and resolves issues to streamline support and deliver a 
better experience. 

  Lifecycle System Assurance—Rely on the latest 
Release Certification Matrix from VCE to streamline 
software release planning and configuration 
management across all hardware and software. VCE is 
taking this unique customer sought-after VCE 
Experience to its integrated solutions, enabling an 
unmatched user experience and supporting a 
combination of traditional and emerging workloads. 

For More Information 
More information about VCE solutions and services is 
available from www.vce.com and from your local VCE 
representative.  

 

 

 

 

ABOUT VCE 
VCE, formed by Cisco and EMC with investments from VMware and Intel, accelerates the adoption of converged infrastructure 
and cloud-based computing models that dramatically reduce the cost of IT while improving time to market for our customers. 
VCE, through the Vblock Systems, delivers the industry's only fully integrated and fully virtualized cloud infrastructure 
system. VCE solutions are available through an extensive partner network, and cover horizontal applications, vertical industry 
offerings, and application development environments, allowing customers to focus on business innovation instead of 
integrating, validating, and managing IT infrastructure. 
For more information, go to vce.com. 
 
 

 

 
Copyright © 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. VCE, VCE Vision, Vblock, and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company LLC or 
its affiliates in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

10012014 

