SOLUTIONS BRIEF 

VCE™ INTEGRATED SOLUTION FOR CLOUD 
MANAGEMENT WITH CISCO  

vce.com

You also enjoy the signature “VCE Experience”—including 
lifecycle assurance and validation for the software, plus 
single-number support.  

The solution can also pave the path for additional cloud 
computing software and technologies such as Cisco 
Intelligent Automation for Cloud, Prime Service Catalog, and 
Intercloud—enabling you to offer on-demand services in your 
own private cloud environment, as a hosted virtual private 
cloud, or easily extend into multi-tenant public clouds. 

The VCE and Cisco Difference 
The integrated solution  provides everything you need to 
quickly deliver cloud infrastructure automation services to 
your customers with simplicity and industry-leading customer 
experience:  

  “Out-of-the-box” integration of best-in-class Cisco UCS 
Director software with the Vblock System for bare-metal 
compute (UCS), hypervisor (VMware), storage (EMC), 
and network (Nexus) provisioning 

  Physical and virtual infrastructure automation 

  UCS Director pre-installed on a Vblock System  

300 family or Vblock System 700 family in the VCE 
factory  

  Pre-testing of the software components, including 

purpose-built workflows for the Vblock System 

  Integration with VCE Vision™ Intelligent Operations 

software—making Cisco UCS Director your centralized 
control point for provisioning, monitoring, and management 

  Ongoing release validation with VCE™ Support—an 

add-on guarantee that all installed components operate 
the way they should 

  A proven foundation from which to rapidly develop 

additional cloud capabilities and deploy into production  

Going Beyond Converged Infrastructure 
VCE and Vblock® Systems offer the fastest deployment of 
infrastructure and applications, the highest application 
performance and availability, the lowest TCO, and 
unmatched lifecycle assurance. 

As cloud adoption rates rapidly increase, IT departments 
and service providers look to Vblock Systems as the best 
foundation for providing highly secure, reliable cloud 
services. Important first steps for successful delivery of 
these services include 

  Automating, managing, and orchestrating  

Vblock Systems. 

  Finding the right foundational cloud infrastructure 

automation and management solutions for  
your business. 

  Avoiding the extensive, on-site service integration 
engagements typically required to “stand up” these 
technologies—often leading to project delays, cost 
overruns, and negative customer experiences.  

  Ensuring you can reliably maintain, upgrade, and 
support that environment—to provide a superior 
experience for IT and business users.  

High-Value Foundation for Private Cloud 
Building on the proven success of VCE™ Vblock System 
converged infrastructure, and with our customers’  
challenges in mind, VCE is evolving its portfolio to include 
new integrated solutions. 

Jointly developed with Cisco, VCE™ Integrated Solution  
for Cloud Management with Cisco provides a “starter kit” to 
quickly deliver foundational cloud infrastructure automation 
and provisioning—increasing IT agility while reducing  
complexity and costs. 

The solution pre-integrates and validates Cisco UCS Director 
software on a Vblock System in the VCE factory. Backed by 
its brief on-site configuration services, the solution enables 
you to manage your Vblock System infrastructure and deliver 
infrastructure-as-a-service about 15 days after your Vblock 
System arrives. Now, you can rapidly address the needs of 
customers by offering pre-configured workflows through this 
solution built on VCE proven converged infrastructure and 
industry-leading technology from Cisco.  

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

IT and cloud admins have everything they need for rapid, 
efficient provisioning: 
  Bare-Metal OS Provisioning  

o  ESXi, Linux and Windows* support 
o  UCS configuration, network configuration, storage 

configuration 

o  Virtualization configuration 
o  Zero-touch automation 

  Datastore Storage (Block or File) Provisioning  

o  Storage provisioning (block or file) 
o  SAN zoning (block only) 
o  Storage mount configuration on virtualization platform 
o  Zero-touch automation 

  End-to-End Network Provisioning  

(Storage: File Only) 
o  Allocate VLANs and IP blocks per group/tenant 
o  Create VLANs on N1Kv, UCS compute, Nexus,  

and storage 

o  Zero-touch automation 

  Secure Multi-Tenant Infrastructure Provisioning 
o  Layer-2 end-to-end infrastructure isolation for a 

group/tenant 

o  Compute (physical and virtual), network (physical  

and virtual), and storage provisioning  

  Discovery and Compliance Validation (VCE  

Vision™ Software Integration) 
o  Registration and discovery of Vblock System 

components 

o  Compliance scores and health state visible through 

UCS Director dashboard  

o  Check Release Certification Matrix compliance  

prior to workflow execution 

 

Solution Benefits 
Operational simplicity  
  Get foundational cloud infrastructure automation “out of 

the box”—pre-integrated, pre-validated Cisco UCS 
Director software delivered on a Vblock System.  

  Gain centralized visibility, keeping IT operations in 

control and knowledgeable of the health and status of 
Vblock System infrastructure and configurations. 

  Free IT staff from mundane manual tasks, allowing them 

to focus on new Vblock System based cloud services. 

  Enjoy full lifecycle assurance (ongoing release 

certification and VCE Support). 

Flexibility 
  Extend the solution to 

o  Implement additional cloud capabilities (such as 
advanced security, business continuity, disaster 
recovery, monitoring, chargeback). 

o  Create additional or customized workflows. 
o  Integrate with your own existing operational systems 

(i.e. monitoring or ticketing systems). 

  Choose services available via VCE, Cisco, or your 

VCE/Cisco partner. 

Fast time-to-value 
  Gain a reliable, cost-effective foundation for private 

cloud with long-term TCO benefits compared to  
highly customized, time-consuming solutions that  
are not supportable. 

  Reduce cloud infrastructure provisioning and 

management time.  

  Accelerate your business and avoid unexpected 
problems with Cisco UCS Director’s model-based 
orchestration.  

Built For Today’s IT Organizations 
We’ve built the solution to meet vital business demands for 
today’s infrastructure and operations teams. It’s the perfect 
solution whether you need to 

  Rapidly set up on-demand cloud infrastructure for 
test/QA or basic production workloads—with the  
option to “build from there.”  

  Build a simple starting point to optimize the 

effectiveness of your ops team. 

  Provide infrastructure services to external customers 

and want the right “head start” to provide the experience 
they deserve. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

 

Extend VCE Experience to Cloud Management 
  Greater Agility—Each VCE Integrated Solution for 

Cloud Management is an extension of the Vblock System 
that is engineered, manufactured, maintained, and 
supported as a single system. The solutions can be 
ordered and delivered within 45 days, with additional 
time-to-value of about 15 days. Vblock Systems are 
deployed by our 150 “Vblock Ready™” global qualified 
partners, giving customers a choice of certified 
professionals that use standardized, proven services. 
This translates into faster time-to-production for projects 
and follow-on activities, and faster time-to-business value.  

  Reduce Complexity and Risk—Every Vblock System 

is pre-engineered and validated in a VCE factory 
environment. This pre-engineering, pre-test, and pre-
validation are applied to integrated solutions for Cloud 
Management, greatly reducing deployment time and 
risk.  

  Comprehensive Services—VCE can help you develop 

a cloud computing roadmap, and deploy and integrate 
your systems quickly to ensure operational success.  

Post-deployment, VCE Support proactively identifies  
and resolves issues to streamline support and deliver  
a better experience. 

  Lifecycle System Assurance—Rely on the latest 
Release Certification Matrix from VCE to streamline 
software release planning and configuration 
management across all hardware and software 
platforms. VCE is taking this unique customer sought- 
after VCE Experience to its integrated solutions , 
enabling an unmatched user experience and supporting 
a combination of traditional and emerging workloads. 

For More Information 
More information about VCE solutions and services is 
available from www.vce.com and from your local VCE 
representative. 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

ABOUT VCE 
VCE, formed by Cisco and EMC with investments from VMware and Intel, accelerates the adoption of converged infrastructure 
and cloud-based computing models that dramatically reduce the cost of IT while improving time to market for our customers. 
VCE, through the Vblock Systems, delivers the industry's only fully integrated and fully virtualized cloud infrastructure 
system. VCE solutions are available through an extensive partner network, and cover horizontal applications, vertical industry 
offerings, and application development environments, allowing customers to focus on business innovation instead of 
integrating, validating, and managing IT infrastructure. 
For more information, go to vce.com. 
 
 

 

 
Copyright © 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. VCE, VCE Vision, Vblock, and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company LLC or 
its affiliates in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

09292014 

