 

VirtualWisdom® MOBILE MONITORING OPTION 

 As a member of the Virtual Instruments’ VirtualWisdom solutions family, the Mobile Monitoring 
Option (MMO) is designed to provide all of the features and benefits of VirtualWisdom-based 
instrumentation, monitoring, and measurement in a purpose-built, mobile cabinet, designed to 
house SANInsightTM Fibre Channel monitoring equipment.  Use of the MMO enables IT staff to 
easily and quickly deploy an infrastructure optimizing VirtualWisdom solution anywhere in the 
datacenter.  

  Substantially speeds troubleshooting 

of applications not associated with 
static VirtualWisdom deployments 
  Complements the TAP Patch Panel 

System by allowing ad hoc 
VirtualWisdom SAN Performance Probe 
deployments  

  Operational with doors closed and 

locked for maximum security 

  Cost-effectively extends benefits of 
hardware-based monitoring to more 
applications and data centers  

 
 

Enterprise IT staffs are often faced with a difficult decision 
on where to most effectively deploy a Virtual Instruments’ 
VirtualWisdom SAN monitoring solution.  A best practice 
recommendation is to deploy Fibre Channel TAPS and SAN 
Availability Probe  across the datacenter, deploy SAN 
Performance Probe  Fibre Channel monitoring at the most 
mission critical SAN infrastructure, and deploy the MMO on 
an as-needed basis.   “Mission critical” is usually not 
defined in a binary fashion, but is normally a continuum 
and highly dynamic.  The MMO enables IT staff to deploy 
hardware probe monitoring to any application in the 
datacenter on a cost-effective, ad hoc basis.  
 
MMO Use Cases 
Speeds troubleshooting 

For IT staff that need to quickly respond to application 
slowdowns or outages with the best possible troubleshooting 
solution, the MMO offers all the functionality of a SANInsight 
SAN Performance Probe based monitoring solution. 

 
Reduces risks of new projects 
 
Use the MMO with new Fibre Channel SAN deployments to 
ensure the Fibre Channel physical infrastructure is error-free, 
and validate new technologies. 

 

Find over-provisioned links 

Allows IT staff to apply the MMO to portions of the SAN to find 
opportunities to cut costs by consolidating expensive FC 
switch ports. 

                             

                            Figure 1 MMO 

                       

 
 

 

 

Establish Baseline Metrics 

Establish baseline metrics for future troubleshooting and 
performance optimization. 

 

 

 

VirtualInstruments.com 

 

 
Extend VirtualWisdom Value 
The MMO enables IT staff to apply the value of a static VirtualWisdom deployment to all datacenter applications.   Companies 
around the globe use VirtualWisdom to help speed problem resolution, improve tiering, reduce downtime, improve performance, 
find unused or underused LUNs, reduce the risk of implementing a private cloud computing model, and many other optimization 
cases

 

 
Features 

 

 

 

 

optional roll in/roll out ramp   

(1) 2U rack mount server and 1U console 

Fibre Channel monitoring instrumentation 

up to either A: (3) SAN Performance Probe or 

  Reusable, rebuildable shipping container with 

  Mounts combinations of SANInsight components 

  Purpose‐built mobile cabinet houses SANInsight 
Protocol Analyzer units and (2) E‐72 Rovers OR B: 
(Jumpstart Kit Server Option), (2) E‐72 Rovers, 
(2) 20A, 120‐240V PDUs with customer‐specified 
on rear, includes front‐to‐rear pass-throughs 

and (2) SAN Performance Probe or Protocol 
Analyzer units 

cord sets (20 or 30 amp, 120, 208, or 240V, 
straight blade or locking plugs) 

  24 port Gigabit Ethernet Switch; component 

(4) 1U horizontal cable managers on front rails, (2) 

patch and uplink cables 

 

 

                         Figure 2 MMO Cabinet Front and Side Elevations 

 

 

 

 

 

  Depending on component configuration, up to (2) 

2U drawers for patch cable and tool storage 

handles, and bumpers for portability 

rated to 600 lbs (cabinet weight 150 lbs) 

  21U usable rack, 34” usable depth 

  16 gage all‐steel, fully welded construction; load 
  4” anti‐static swivel locking casters, grab 
side‐to‐side reversible 
  Side‐mounted, reversible spool for fiber patch 

  Steel mesh locking front and rear doors; open 

parallel to sides, lift off removable, and 

cable storage and management 

  Sides extensively louvered for airflow 
  Side and bottom entries for fiber and Ethernet 

patch cables and power cords 

 

 

 

 

 

  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

Figure 3 View Showing Side Patch 
Cable Manager and Entries 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                        

Dashboard and Views 

Servers 
and  
VMs 

FC 
Switch 
Fabric 

Storage 
Arrays 

ProbeVM 
Software 

ProbeV 
Software 

TAP Patch 
Panel System  

                                                             Figure 4 SAN Diagram with MMO 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
           

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Corporate Headquarters 
25 Metro Drive Suite 400 
San Jose, CA 95110 
Phone:  408-579-4000 
Fax:  408-579-4001 

 

Sales 
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Phone:  408-579-4081 

Support 
support@virtualinstruments.com 
 

©2011 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom®, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are trademarks or registered 
trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or service marks of, and are used to identify, products or services of 
their respective owners.  8/11 

 

