 

VCE PRODUCTION READINESS SERVICE  

Overview 
Virtualization and cloud computing transform the way IT 
departments operate and provide value to their business 
stakeholders. By integrating advanced technologies from 
Cisco, EMC, and VMware, VblockTM Systems enable 
customers to quickly deploy a virtualized infrastructure to 
accelerate the journey to IT transformation. Vblock Systems 
offer a flexible and economical model for delivering IT 
services while providing the agility needed to respond to ever-
changing market opportunities. 

VCE offers skilled technical resources to help ensure non-
disruptive deployment of Vblock Systems into the data center 
to accelerate return on investment.  

Production Readiness Service 
VCE Production Readiness Service enables the customer to 
quickly and transparently integrate the Vblock System into 
new or existing data center environments. Expert design, 
installation, and integration services deliver rapid return on 
investment and reduce the risk associated with introducing 
new technology into IT infrastructure. The responsibilities 
associated with the integration shift from the IT team to VCE 
specialized technical consultants, all of whom are trained in 
all aspects of Vblock Systems.  

Service Description 
The Production Readiness Service provides planning, design, 
deployment, and integration services for Vblock Systems in 
the customer’s virtualized data center. The service includes 
the VCE Deployment and Implementation (D&I) Service, 
VMware vSphere plan, design, and integration, and the 
development of Operations documentation that includes a 
runbook for the day-to-day operations of the Vblock System.  
In addition, VCE provides project management and 
implementation support to coordinate the installation.  

VCE technical consultants help align the scalability, flexibility, 
and cost-saving features associated with Vblock Systems 
with the customer’s operational objectives. They use best 
practices and proven processes to integrate Vblock Systems 
into the data center environment non-disruptively. A project 
manager engages with the customer team to facilitate clear 
communication, minimal disruption, transparent integration, 
and thorough knowledge transfer. The service engagement 
consists of three phases:  

VCE D&I Service 
VCE technical consultants engage with the customer team to 
develop a project plan, including comprehensive risk 
management and specific project deliverables and tasks. 
Major service activities for D&I are highlighted below:  

  Develop a Vblock System architecture and integration 

plan to deliver improved data center reliability, 
maintainability, and performance. 

  Define configuration parameters and create a 

configuration guide. 

  Develop test and acceptance plans. 

  Review the implementation plan and schedules prior to 
starting a Vblock System deployment to confirm that all 
equipment is ready for installation. After this review, the 
Vblock System is installed and powered up. 

  Configure the system, unified network, storage, 

compute, and management software, including Cisco 
Unified Computing System Manager, EMC Ionix 
management software, and VMware vSphere. 

  Conduct an end-to-end, integrated test of the Vblock 

System to validate connectivity, operations, and 
functions. 

  Test the functionality of the Vblock System within the 

customer environment. 

vSphere Design, Integration and Deployment 
VCE technical consultants develop vSphere design 
documents covering the architecture and design, design 
implementation guidelines, and roadmap. Installation 
documents are developed to cover the installation and 
configuration guidelines and procedures, and operational 
documents cover operations procedures, verification, and 
design verification. Following the design phase, VCE 
technical consultants deploy and integrate the VMware 
vSphere design using best practices that ensure a sound 
infrastructure. 

Operations Runbook, Knowledge Transfer, and 
Acceptance  
In the final stage of the service, the project plan is reviewed to 
ensure that all project milestones were reached consistent 
with the results and specifications outlined during the 
planning phase of the project. VCE creates an operations 
guide for the customer’s staff that covers operations and 
troubleshooting. VCE then conducts knowledge-transfer 

© 2013 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. 

 

 

 

 

session(s) based on the operations guide in order to enable 
infrastructure handoff to the customer. 

Related Services 

VCE Residency Service  
The VCE Resident resource can be extended beyond the 
initial duration included in the Production Readiness Service. 
The Residency Service can be extended in monthly 
increments equivalent to 160 hours. 

VCE Infrastructure Migration Service 
VCE has a proven Vblock Infrastructure Migration solution 
that enables customers to migrate physical and virtual 
servers rapidly to realize a higher ROI from their Vblock 
System. This turnkey, scalable, rapid-migration service 
enables large-scale projects to ramp up quickly while 
delivering high migration rates and significantly higher project 
success. 

Broad Ecosystem of Partners to Accelerate 
Customer Success  
VCE is dedicated to providing customers with the fastest, 
most effective path to pervasive virtualization and cloud 
computing. VCE has developed a broad ecosystem of 
partners around the world who have been trained to deliver 
professional services that are designed to take full advantage 
of Vblock Systems. These partners adhere to industry best 
practices and proven deployment processes that VCE 
Services has developed, so they can facilitate each 
customer’s journey and accelerate success for the customer. 

For More Information 
More information about VCE solutions and services is 
available at www.vce.com and from your VCE representative. 

ABOUT VCE 
VCE, formed by Cisco and EMC with investments from VMware and Intel, accelerates the adoption of converged 
infrastructure and cloud-based computing models that dramatically reduce the cost of IT while improving time to 
market for our customers. VCE, through the Vblock Systems, delivers the industry's only fully integrated and fully 
virtualized cloud infrastructure system. VCE solutions are available through an extensive partner network, and 
cover horizontal applications, vertical industry offerings, and application development environments, allowing 
customers to focus on business innovation instead of integrating, validating, and managing IT infrastructure. 
For more information, go to www.vce.com. 
 

 

 
Copyright © 2013 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, LLC. and/or its affiliates 
in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. 

 

© 2013 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

 

 

 

