PCI COMPLIANCE

WITH VBLOCK™ INFRASTRUCTURE PLATFORMS

With more and more economic transactions 
happening online, criminal activity in cyber-
space is on the rise. Addressing this trend,  
the recently released Payment Card Industry 
Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) version 2.0  
reinforces the need for organizations to identify 
all system components, people, and processes 
to be included in a PCI DSS assessment. As a 
result, many companies are refining processes 
and looking at how to achieve compliance with 
new standards this year. 

$

THE HIGH 
PRICE OF  
DATA 
BREACHES

The Ponemon Institute 2009 annual study found:

$6.75 million   

Average organizational cost of a data breach 

Average cost per compromised record 

 

 
$204 
100% increase 

 

Double the incidence of malicious attacks in 2008, 
from 12% to 24%

40% higher 

 

The cost per record for breaches by malicious or 
criminal acts than breaches caused by negligent 
insiders or system glitches

3.7% 

Abnormal customer churn rate, measured by loss of 
customers directly affected by a data breach

42% 

 

 

Amount of cases studied involving outsourced data 
to third parties

TESTED,  
VALIDATED, 
AND AUDITED 
FOR PCI  
COMPLIANCE

VCE joined with Cisco, 
RSA, and HyTrust to test, 
validate, and audit a PCI-
compliant architecture us-
ing the Vblock 1 platform. A 
Verizon Business Qualified 
Security Assessor (QSA) 
reviewed the products and 
network designs and issued 
an assessment report. VCE 
is an integral part of the 
Cisco PCI solution, which 
includes Cisco network 
architectures and validated 
network designs. For more 
information, see the Cisco 
PCI Solution for Retail 2.0 
Design and Implementation 
Guide.

PCI DSS version 2.0 also clarifies the “one server” rule discussed in earlier 
versions, making clear that there is no conflict between PCI compliance and 
infrastructure virtualization. This is good news for IT organizations—in industries 
ranging from higher education to healthcare—as they now can more fully realize 
the CAPex and OPex benefits of virtualization and cloud computing in their 
environments. 

Simplifying Compliance

Achieving and maintaining PCI compliance over time requires diligence. It is 
easy for systems to lapse when business needs change and grow. IT needs a  
solution that helps secure cardholder data and ensures customer privacy at 
every point in the data flow, from e-commerce sites and third-party payment 
processors to the corporate data center. Security must be ensured at every  
level of the infrastructure across server, network, and storage domains. 

There are no out-of-the-box PCI solutions. Each company must design and 
implement its own processes and infrastructure, evaluating and fine-tuning to 
maintain compliance over time. 

However, some solutions are simpler than others. When vendors cooperate to 
deliver complementary functionality, customers benefit. Cisco, a parent company 
of VCE, working with VCE, EMC, and others, has demonstrated PCI compliance 
as part of a virtualized, multi-vendor PCI environment. Technology from VCE 
eases the IT burden of integrating and managing the data center infrastructure 
while offering the security and availability organizations need.

A Secure and Extensible Virtual Infrastructure

The VblockTM Infrastructure Platforms are fully integrated units of infrastructure 
designed and factory-integrated for virtualized environments. At every level of 
the stack, virtualization, security, and ease of management are designed in the 
Vblock systems. 

Vblock Infrastructure Platforms are available in multiple configurations, making 
it easy to choose the package best suited to an organization’s needs—deployment 
in wired and wireless physical environments, enterprise data centers, contact 
centers, and the Internet edge to support e-commerce operations, employees, 
customers, and teleworkers. They also support wireless 3G technology  
deployments and nontraditional retail formats, including pop-up stores  
and convenience stores.

WANT TO LEARN MORE ABOUT VBLOCK 

INFRASTRUCTURE PLATFORMS? 

An Integrated Platform for Rapid Deployment 
and Simplified Support

Vblock Infrastructure Platforms combine industry-
leading compute, network, storage, virtualization, and 
management technologies into prepackaged units of 
infrastructure. VCE ships factory-integrated platforms 
as a single, pretested product, freeing IT organizations 
from the lengthy, labor-intensive integration tasks 
associated with multi-vendor infrastructure offerings. 
This approach accelerates deployment and simplifies 
operations. 

VCE provides support for the converged infrastructure 
as a single product. Support engineers are experts in 
the entire infrastructure, utilize advanced collaboration 
capabilities, and have direct access into engineering 
resources at Cisco, EMC, and VMware. 

The architecture is flexible and extensible, easily  
expandable from a few hundred VMs to tens of  
thousands of VMs. As Vblock platforms are added,  
the capacity of the Vblock platforms scales either as 
an aggregated pool, whereby any blade can access 
any storage disks on the SAN, or as isolated silos. This 
approach offers an organization the ability to configure 
Vblock platforms to achieve their compliance, availability, 
and fault-isolation objectives using a single, flexible 
infrastructure.

The tight integration between server and network 
environments helps ensure consistent, policy-based 
network capabilities to all servers in the data center. It 
allows policies to move with a VM during live migration, 
which ensures persistent network, security, and storage 
compliance for improved business continuity and 
performance management. The Vblock platform can 
deliver uncompromising high availability, security,  
scalability, and ease of management. 

Hosting multiple, related applications within the same 
Vblock platform reduces the traffic that needs to flow 
into and out from the Vblock platform, potentially  
preventing network bottlenecks. It also provides certain 
advantages in securing the entire network infrastructure 
that supports the related applications. 

A New Approach to Change Management
In the PCI arena, change management adds to the compliance  
challenge. VCE implements a unique approach to release and  
configuration management to further simplify IT operations. By 
taking responsibility for integrating roadmaps for all infrastructure 
products, we relieve IT of the burden of patch integration testing. 
VCE makes available on formal release schedules validated and 
fully regressed software releases and firmware upgrades that cover 
the entire platform. 

Enhance Business Security and Risk Management
Beyond helping businesses meet PCI compliance requirements, 
Vblock Infrastructure Platforms create a strong overall security 
foundation. The same infrastructure used to help achieve PCI  
compliance also helps enforce security best practices, protect  
assets, and mitigate the risk of noncompliance fines, penalties,  
and lost revenue.

Vblock Infrastructure Platforms include an open security frame- 
work that simplifies integration with existing security tools and 
frameworks. In addition, Vblock solutions provide protection at  
the network, hypervisor, and VM level. 

Organizations can easily extend existing policies in the physical 
domain to the virtual domain while adding new capabilities to  
enhance security from “as good as physical” to “better than physical.” 
Third-party technologies, such as those available from RSA and  
HyTrust, provide integration with enterprise security frameworks 
and enable consistent security between physical and virtual  
infrastructure.

Ready for a New Way to Do IT?
VCE simplifies deployment and management of virtual infrastructure 
environments, making it easy to extend the benefits of virtualization 
to more of a business’ critical applications. An extensive partner 
ecosystem offers services and customized solutions to enable the 
IT transformation. 

ABOUT VCE

VCE, the Virtual Computing Environment 
Company formed by Cisco and EMC 
with investments from VMware and Intel, 
accelerates the adoption of converged 
infrastructure and cloud-based computing 
models that dramatically reduce the 
cost of IT while improving time to market 
for our customers. VCE, through the 
Vblock platform, delivers the industry’s 
first completely integrated IT offering 
with end-to-end vendor accountability. 
VCE’s prepackaged solutions are available 
through an extensive partner network, 
and cover horizontal applications, vertical 
industry offerings, and application develop-
ment environments, allowing customers  
to focus on business innovation instead  
of integrating, validating, and managing  
IT infrastructure. 
For more information,  
go to www.vce.com.

