 

Virtual Instruments Description of Service for 

PS-POV and PS-PAK-POV 

in 

or 

this  DOS 

 
Background. This document contains a Description of 
Service  (“DOS”)  for  Virtual  Instruments  Corporation’s 
(“Virtual 
Instruments”)  Proof  of  Value  services 
identified  by  the  following  part  numbers:  (1)  PS-POV 
and (2) PS-PAK-POV. 
 
Virtual Instruments will perform the services described 
herein (“Services”) provided that (1) Virtual Instruments 
issues, and the ordering party (“Purchaser”) accepts, a 
quote referencing the part number(s) given above; and 
(2) Virtual Instruments and the Purchaser are bound by 
terms and conditions that incorporate by reference this 
document. If no such terms and conditions have been 
agreed  upon  between  us,  Virtual  Instruments  will 
perform  the  Services  on  an  “AS  IS”  basis  without 
warranties of any kind. The recipient of the Service is 
the  customer  (“Customer”).    The  Purchaser  of  the 
Service  may  be  either 
the  Customer  or  Virtual 
Instruments’ 
distributor 
reseller 
authorized 
(“Partner”).    If  Partner  is  the  Purchaser,  then  Partner 
must  either  facilitate  direct  communication  between 
Virtual  Instruments  and  Customer  or  secure  from 
Customer  all  required  access,  instructions  and  other 
commitments  outlined 
for  Virtual 
Instruments to perform the Service. 
 
To request these Services or inquire about this or other 
Virtual  Instruments  service  offerings,  please  contact 
sales@virtualinstruments.com. 
 
SERVICE DESCRIPTION AND SCOPE.  Delivered  by 
Virtual Instruments expert services staff, each Proof of 
Value  (“POV”)  is  custom-designed  to  meet  the  needs 
of  the  prospective  Customer.  The  Virtual  Instruments 
account 
solutions 
consultant),  services  engineer  and  project  manager 
join with the Customer to specify approach, success  
 
The  PS-POV  Service  includes  the  temporary,  loaned 
use  of  Virtual  Instruments  VirtualWisdom  software 
products,  which  are  subject  to  a  separate  Software 
Evaluation Agreement. Such products are available for 
purchase  or  license  separately  from  the  Service,  but 
are only supplied as tools for purposes of rendering the 
Service. 
 
The  PS-PAK-POV  Service  includes  the  temporary, 
loaned  use  of  a  complete,  mobile  monitoring  system 
(“PAK”  or  “Mini-PAK”  or  portable  assessment  kit) 
comprised of Virtual Instruments products and related 
hardware and networking equipment, which are subject 
to  a  separate  Software  Evaluation  Agreement.  Such 
products  are  available 
license 
separately  from  the  Service  and  are  only  supplied  as 
tools  for  purposes  of  rendering  the  Service.  The  PAK 
will  be  shipped  via  ground  carrier;  return  freight  is 
included. The PAK is provided for one week, with three 
 

(sales  manager  and 

for  purchase  or 

team 

additional  days’  allowance  for  preparing  the  PAK  for 
shipment back to Virtual Instruments. 
 
Virtual Instruments will either (1) set up and configure 
the software on a Customer-provided server (PS-POV) 
or (2) set up and configure the PAK (PS-PAK-POV) per 
the  pre-defined  scope  and  data  will  be  collected  for 
purposes of product demonstration and also to provide 
proof  of  the  success  criteria.  Virtual  Instruments  will 
review  the  collected  data  and  prepare  a  custom 
presentation based upon the success criteria. 
 
The Service includes the following resources and tools: 
one  (1)  onsite  consultant,  one  (1)  location,  and  up  to 
5,120  switch  ports,  equivalent  to  ten  director-class 
switches.  For  PS-PAK-POV  engagements,  one  (1) 
week of PAK rental and up to eight (8) tapped storage 
links will be included. The Service must be complete in 
a period not to exceed five (5) business days. 
 
The Services will be provided during normal business 
hours (Monday through Friday, 8:00 AM – 5:00 PM) at 
the monitored location. To the extent the Services are 
provided remotely, they will be provided in the range of 
7:00  AM  –  5  :00  PM  Pacific  Time  US  unless  both 
companies  agree  to  an  alternative  work  schedule. 
Virtual  Instruments  requires  five  (5)  business  days 
advance notice prior to scheduling any work related to 
these Services; ten (10) days if travel is required. 
 
ACTIVITIES.  The  Service  entails 
activities: 
1. 

 (PS-PAK-POV)  The  use  of  a  Virtual  Instruments 
PAK  or  Mini-Pak,  as  determined  by  Virtual 
Instruments. The Service does not include TAPs or 
TPPSs,  which  must  be  purchased  separately  in 
order to utilize this Service. 

following 

2.  Project  management  to  prepare  for  the  hardware 
(PS-PAK-POV only) and software deployment and 
monitoring. A Virtual Instruments Project Manager 
will: 

the 

a.  Coordinate  Virtual  Instruments  resource 
schedules  with  the  Customer’s  schedule, 
including calls, web  meetings, and on-site 
work. 

b.  Provide  deployment  preparation  materials 
to 
them  when 
completed and distribute as appropriate to 
project staff. 

the  Customer,  collect 

c.  Coordinate further distribution of materials 

as required during the service. 

3. 

 (PS-PAK-POV) Web-based training on technology 
and  best  practices  for  installation  and  insertion  of 
TAPs. Training will last no more than one hour and 
will  cover  the  following  topics:    TAP  technology, 
best  practices  for  TAP  deployments  and  testing.  
Please  note 
is  not 
responsible for the installation and insertion of the 
TAPs  and  routing  of  the  Fibre  Channel  cabling 
from the TAPs to the PAK location. 

that  Virtual 

Instruments 

 
4.  On-site 

to 

for  up 

resource 

three  days 

for 
installation and configuration of the PAK (PS-PAK-
POV)  or  the  Customer-provided  server  (PS-POV) 
and  to  assist  with  pulling  data  to  support  the 
success  criteria. 
follow  Virtual 
Instruments’ standard installation methodology and 
documentation. 

Installation  will 

5.  Up  to  two  days  to  review  collected  data  and  to 

prepare the custom presentation. 

7. 

6.  Final  webinar  or  live  meeting  with  the  Virtual 
the 

review 

to 

Instruments  account 
team 
presentation with the Customer. 
 (PS-PAK-POV) Customer will be trained on how to 
uninstall  the  PAK  and  prepare  for  return  shipping 
to Virtual Instruments.  Customer is responsible for 
uninstalling  and  returning  the  PAK  on  time  within 
three  (3)  days  of  completion  of  the  Services.  The 
PAK  will  be  considered  returned  when 
is 
provided 
Instruments-selected 
shipping  provider.  If  Virtual  Instruments  does  not 
receive  the  PAK  on  time,  Purchaser  will  be 
responsible for additional PAK delayed return fees 
of $14,000 per week or portion thereof.  PAK rental 
fees  will  not  be  incurred  for  any  period  of  delay 
caused  by  Virtual 
the  Virtual 
Instruments-selected shipping provider. 

Instruments  or 

the  Virtual 

to 

it 

 
ESTIMATED  START  DATE  AND  DURATION.  The 
Service  will  commence  on  a  mutually  agreeable  date 
following  receipt  of  a  valid  purchase  order  from 
Purchaser.  Project  duration  is  strictly  limited  to  one 
week (five (5) consecutive business days). 
 
PROJECT COMPLETION. Upon the conclusion of the 
Services,  Virtual  Instruments,  with  the  assistance  of 
the  Customer,  will  remove  the  Tools  (as  applicable) 
from the Customer sites. 
 
SERVICE  REQUIREMENTS.  The  Service  entails  the 
following  activities  to  be  completed  by  Customer  or 
Partner, as applicable: 
1.  Designation  of  a  Partner  or  Customer 

(as 
applicable)  project  manager 
to  whom  all 
communications  shall  be  addressed.  The  project 
manager will provide (a) information and resources 
in  a 
timely  manner  as  needed  by  Virtual 
Instruments 
to 
complete  the  Service  described  in  this  DOS;  and 
(b)  will  provide  logical  and  physical  access  as 
required  by  Virtual  Instruments  to  complete  the 
Service;  and  (c)  will  be  readily  available  and  on-
site  as  and  when  required  by  Virtual  Instruments 
for the duration of the Service.  

to  enable  Virtual 

Instruments 

2.  Completion  of  the  deployment  checklist  prior  to 
Virtual  Instruments  scheduling  the  on-site  portion 
of the Service. 

3.  Ongoing  access  to  a  work  area  with  a  telephone, 
Internet  access,  with  access  to  any  facilities  and 
systems necessary for completion of the Service. 

 

to 

4.  Data center space within a two and one-half (2.5) 
meter  cable  run  of  the  installed  TAPs  into  which 
the  PAK  will  be  placed  where  (1)  it  will  not  be 
disturbed,  (2)  it  will  have  uninterrupted  power—at 
least  one  (1)  dedicated  circuit  of  15,  20  or  30 
amps, and (3) Ethernet network access (one static 
IP  address) 
the  Customer 
environment that will monitored. 

the  portion  of 

5.  Ongoing communication between Customer and/or 
Partner  personnel  with 
the  designated  Virtual 
Instruments personnel and make their appropriate 
staff  available  (such  as  network,  system  and 
storage administrators) to participate in the project 
activities  as  required,  during  or  outside  of  normal 
business hours.  

6.  For any remote Services that require access to the 
Customer’s  VirtualWisdom  server(s),  a  client 
system 
(such  as 
GoToMeeting®  or  WebEx®)  or  enabled  Virtual 
Instruments  RemoteWisdom® 
remote  desktop 
access. 

run  a  web  session 

7.  For any on-site Services, either temporary access 
badges for Virtual Instruments personnel to access 
secure computing areas or an authorized resource 
to allow Virtual Instruments and Virtual Instruments 
personnel  entry  and  exit  to  and  from  secure 
computing areas. 

8.  Ensure  that  instrumented  host  systems,  switches 
and storage components are on-site or accessible 
remotely and functional. 

to 

9.  Prompt 

feedback  and 

to  Virtual 
Instruments requests, particularly concerning data, 
documentation and attendance. 

response 

10.  (PS-PAK-POV)  The  purchase  of  all  TAPs  and 
Fiber Optic cables as needed to connect the TAPs 
to  the  SAN  links  necessary  for  performing  the 
Service. 

11.  (PS-PAK-POV)  After  Virtual  Instruments’  delivery 
of  web-based  TAP-in  best  practices 
training, 
Customer or Partner will insert the TAPs before the 
arrival  of 
Instruments  delivery 
consultants. 

the  Virtual 

12.  For the duration of the Service, Virtual Instruments 

will also require: 

a. 

(PS-PAK-POV)  Uninterrupted 
access to the PAK. 

remote 

b.  Ongoing  network  access  to  devices  and 
to  be  discovered  and 

applications 
monitored by Virtual Instruments. 

c.  A copy of the VirtualWisdom database for 
remote  analysis  if  requested  by  Virtual 
Instruments. 

13.  If any portion of the Service must be rescheduled, 
Purchaser  agrees  to  provide  at  least  ten  (10) 
business  days  advance  written  notice  to  Virtual 
Instruments.  Failure  to  provide  timely  notice  may 
result  in  additional  costs  billed  to  Purchaser  for 
rescheduled travel. 
 

 
Failure  to  comply  with  these  requirements  may  inhibit 
or  prevent  Virtual  Instruments’  ability  to  provide  the 
Service. 
 
USE  OF  VIRTUAL  INSTRUMENTS  PRODUCTS.  To 
perform  the  Services,  Virtual  Instruments  will  employ 
proprietary network monitoring hardware and software 
products,  including  without  limitation,  VirtualWisdom 
Server  and  VirtualWisdom  SAN  Performance  probes 
(“Tools”). 
 
The  Tools  will  be  installed  and  used  solely  by  Virtual 
Instruments personnel at the Customer’s location on a 
temporary  basis,  solely  in  connection  with  and  for 
duration of the Services and may not be used for any 
other  purpose.    No  right,  title  or  interest  in  or  to  the 
Tools is transferred to the Client.  Software Tools will 
be used primarily by Virtual Instruments personnel.  All 
rights  of  access  and  use  of 
the  Tools  shall 
automatically  expire  upon  completion  of  the  Services.  
All  Tools  are  provided  on  an  “AS  IS”  basis  without 
warranties,  indemnities,  or  maintenance  or  support  of 
any  kind.  All  rights  not  granted  by  Virtual  Instruments 
are  reserved  and  prohibited.    This  Service  does  not 
entail any software development. 
 
TRAVEL  AND  EXPENSE  GUIDELINES.  For 
this 
engagement,  all  travel  expenses  are  included  in  the 
Service.  Purchaser will reimburse Virtual Instruments 
for  any  additional 
travel 
expenses  above  and  beyond  that  are  authorized  in 
advance by Purchaser in writing and incurred solely in 
connection with services furnished under this DOS. 

reasonable  and  actual 

 

