 Technical Brief           

 

Metric Definitions for VirtualWisdom 3.x Probes 

 

 

 
 

 UTILIZATION &  
FABRIC ERRORS 

    

 
               

  PERFORMANCE & 
PROTOCOL ERRORS 

                    CROSS DOMAIN 
 
VirtualWisdom® SAN Performance 

VirtualWisdom® Virtual Server 

 

       CORRELATION                                  

Probe adds 

Probe adds 

Disk IO Metrics 
•  HBA Utilization % 
• 
IO Latency 
•  Disk Aborts 

CPU Metrics 
•  CPU Usage % 
•  CPU Idle % 
•  CPU Reserved Capacity 
•  CPU Wait Time 

Memory Metrics 
•  Memory Utilization % 
•  Memory Shared 
•  Memory Swapped 
•  Memory Ballooning 

Network IO Metrics 
•  Network Utilization % 
• 
•  Packet Drops 

Throughput 

ITL-level metrics, more granular 
than ProbeSW 
• 

Enables quicker problem 
resolution 
Enables what-if scenarios for 
port count reduction 
Enables tiering decisions per-
application 

• 

• 

Protocol level events 

Proactive problem detection and 
avoidance 
•  Queue depth information 
• 
•  Bi-directional buffer-to-buffer 

Latency information 

credit information 

Link level (hardware level) events 

Fibre Channel protocol link 
events 
Identify low level problems 

Fibre Channel link groups 
Identify Fibre Channel linkage 
problems 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
       
       

VirtualWisdom® SAN Availability 

Probe 

SAN fabric errors and faults 
Identify critical errors in the SAN 
fabric 
• 
• 
• 
•  Packet discards 
•  CRC errors 

Loss of synchronization 
Link resets 
Link failures 

Buffer credits 

SAN fabric utilization metrics 
Monitors SAN bandwidth 
utilization 
•  Number of frames 
• 

Throughput and utilization 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
VirtualWisdom SAN Performance Probe model FC8 Metrics 
 
 

Fibre Channel Link Source and Device Metrics 

Fibre Channel Link Source Metrics 

Source Type 

Probe Serial Number 

Probe Name 

Interval Time Stamp 

Tap port 

Tap port name 

Device 

Channel 

Definition 

The number assigned to a hardware probe by the factory. 

The name you have assigned to a probe during configuration or the default probe name. 

One second time intervals that were collected and calculated, for example: 1 to 5 minutes, 
1 hour, 1 day, etc. 

Port number being used on the Tap. The port that the tap connected to the probe is 
monitoring. 

Name of the port that tap connected to the probe is monitoring. 

Direction of a duplex link, Channel 1 or Channel 2. 

Fibre Channel Link Counters 

Fibre Channel Link Counters 

Collected Data 

Definition 

Channel 

Frames/sec 

MB/sec 

SCSI MB/sec 

 
SCSI Frames/sec 

 

The Channel being measured. Channel 1 is on the left side of the Probe when you are facing it. 

Total number of frames of any type per second. 

Total megabytes of frame payload data per second. This does not include the SOF, Header, CRC or 
EOF. 

Total megabytes of SCSI frame payload data per second. This includes all SCSI Command, Transfer 
Ready, Data and Status frames. 

Total number of SCSI frames per second. This includes all SCSI Command, Transfer Ready, Data and 
Status frames 

Application Data MB/sec 

Total megabytes of Application payload data per second. Application Data refers only to the payload 
of Solicited and Unsolicited Data frames. 

Application Data Frames/sec           Total Application data frames per second. Application Data refers only to the payload of 

Solicited and Unsolicited Data frames. 

 

Management MB/sec 

Management Frames/sec 

Other MB/sec 

Other Frames/sec 

Total Capacity % 

Total megabytes of FC Management frame payload data per second. This does not include the SOF, 
Header, CRC or EOF. This is a count of all Extended Link Services (ELS), Basic Link Services (BLS), Fibre 
Channel Services (FCS), Link Control (LC) and Fabric Frames (SOF(f)). 

Total number of Fibre Channel Management Frames per second. This is a count of all Extended Link 
Services (ELS), Basic Link Services (BLS), Fibre Channel Services (FCS), Link Control (LC) and Fabric 
Frames (SOF(f)). 

Total megabytes of Non-Management and Non-SCSI frame payload data per second. Does not include 
the SOF, Header, CRC or EOF. 

Total number of Non-Management and Non-SCSI frames per second. 

Amount of overall Bus Capacity utilized in FRAME activity per second. This includes 

Management, SCSI, and Other capacity. 

Management Capacity % 

Amount of overall Bus Capacity utilized in Fibre Channel Management FRAME activity per second. 

SCSI Capacity % 

Other Capacity % 
 

Amount of overall Bus Capacity utilized in SCSI FRAME activity per second. 

Amount of overall Bus Capacity utilized in Fibre Channel Management FRAME activity per second. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fibre Channel Link Events 

Fibre Channel Link Events  

Collected Data 

Definition 

 
Loss of Signal Events 

Number of times the Link has transitioned to a Loss of Signal state in this interval. 

Loss of Sync Events 

Number of times the Link has transitioned to a Loss of Sync state in this interval. 

NOS/OLS Events 

LIP Events 

Number of times primitive sequences of NOS and OLS events have been seen. This is not a count of 
the number of actual NOS/OLS primitives, but the number of sequences of these events. 

Number of times primitive sequences of any LIP events have been seen. This is not a count of the 
number of actual LIP primitives, but the number of sequences of these events. 

Fibre Channel Link Up Events    

Number of times the Link has returned to an Idle state after the transmission of LOS, LOSIG, LIP or 
NOS/OLS events 

Code Violations 

Generally, a Code Violation is a bit error or disparity error occurring in a primitive sequence or Ordered 
Set. A Loss of Sync condition is a repetition of 3 or more code violations. Unframed Data is an Ordered 
Set that does not have a proper K28.5 character as the starting delimiter (i.e. another term for a Code 
Violation). 
It is also important to note that many components can be involved when a CRC error or other bad 
frame transmission occurs. Generally between two devices connected together in a point-to-point 
fashion, there are 6 potential points at which errors can occur (10 if you count the probe or tap). These 
are: 
1.   From the Fibre Channel ASIC to the SERDES on either device. 
2.   From the SERDES to the physical transmitter (generally a GBIC or fixed media 

transmitter) on either device. 

3.   On either transmit wire between the devices. 
If you add the probe in-line, you add many more degrees of complexity in debugging these issues. 
The additional components required to analyze in-line are: 
1.   Two GBICS. 
2.   One more cable, in which either transmitting wire can fail. 

Management Frames 

Management Frames 

Collected Data 

Extended Link Services 
Frames 

Fibre Channel Services 
Frames 

Fabric SOFf Frames 

Basic Fibre Channel Link 
Services 

Fibre Channel Link Control 
Frames 

Logins 

Definition 
 
Number of Fibre Channel Extended Link Services (ELS) Frames (LOGO, PLOGI, ACC, etc.) in this interval. 
Many of these frames have more specific counters listed below. ELS events that do not have a separate 
event counter listed below are generally minor and can indicate normal activities such as events similar 
to a ping. 
 
Number of Fibre Channel Services Frames (Directory Server Management and FC-AL 
Management) in this interval. 

Number of Fabric Frames (SOF(f)) in this interval. SOF(f) frames are traditionally used for 
Inter-Switch Link (E_Port) communications. 
 
Number of Basic Link Services Frames (ABTS, BA_ACC, BA_RJT, etc.) in this interval. 
 
 
Number of Link Control Frames (P_RJT, F_RJT, F_BSY, etc.) in this interval. Note this does 
NOT include ACK frames. 

Number of Fibre Channel Extended Link Service Login Frames (FLOGI, PLOGI, PRLI, ADISC, PDISC, 
FDISC). Login Frames are always a new exchange initiated by either the Initiator or Target. The only login 
functions that a Target device will typically support is an FLOGI to establish communication with a 
switch and the subsequent PLOGI frames to allow for registration in the Name Server on the switch. 
In typical SCSI operating environments, Login Frames between end-points are strong indicators of 
operational or protocol issues between the Initiator and Target. Typically, a login indicates an attempt 
to re-establish failed communications between a pair of devices. 
The FLOGI, PLOGI, PRLI login frames are considered to be “destructive” logins. That is, upon 
successful completion of the login, any previously outstanding exchanges and sequences between 
the devices are discarded and have to be re-issued by the Initiator. The 
“non-destructive” logins (ADISC, PDISC, and FDISC) are not widely implemented due to the inherent 
difficulty in attempting to recover from exchanges and sequences that may or may not be valid following 
the login due to link reset issues and discarded frames. 
VirtualWisdom handles all login frames as destructive and, upon completion of the login, any 
previously outstanding exchange (pending exchange) information will be cleared for the pair of devices 
based upon rules in FC-PH. In addition all of the ITL conversations that were impacted by the login will 
have the minimum pending exchange set to -1 in the SCSI ITL Metrics. This can help to determine which 
devices participated in the login. Devices that participate in a login that do not have any other traffic or 
current pending exchanges will not be flagged with a -1. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Management Frames (continued) 

Collected Data 

Definition 

Logouts 

Abort Sequence Frames 
(ABTS) 

Number of Fibre Channel Extended Link Service Login Frames (LOGO, PRLO, TPRLO). 
Logout Frames can be in response to an exchange or can be an initiation of a new exchange by either 
the Initiator or Target. 
In typical SCSI operating environments, Logout Frames between end-points are strong indicators of 
operational or protocol issues between the Initiator and Target. Typically, a logout indicates a 
communication failure between the two end-points. 
A Logout response from a Target indicates that it cannot support the requested action from the 
Initiator and has terminated its previous login. There are many reasons why this can occur, the most 
common reason being that a Target goes through a Link Reset and has not reestablished communication 
with the Initiator. This generally involves a switched fabric configuration in which the Initiator has not 
handled an RSCN condition properly. 
Some initiators will translate a Bus Reset message from the host operating system into a Third Party 
Process Logout (TPRLO) to each Target or to a single Target. This tends to eliminate the need for a Bus 
Reset but is a very dangerous activity (if not catastrophic) in multi-initiator environments. A TPRLO 
forces the Target and all associated Logical Units (LUNS) within the Target to terminate its logins with 
every Initiator it has a valid login state with. In clustered operating environments, this is the only valid 
solution to a SCSI Reservation deadlock, but in non-clustered environments, this can cause I/O loss and 
data corruption issues. 
In some switched fabric environments, the switch will generate harmless PRLO frames on ports 
following a Link Reset. This happens when a device does not register with the Directory Server following 
a Fabric Login (FLOGI). The Directory Server attempts to discover the type and state of the device so 
that it can be added to the directory. The Directory Server does this by performing PLOGI and PRLI to 
the device. If the device responds to both with an accept (ACC), the Directory Server assumes that the 
device is a Target (supports SCSI Process Login) and then adds the device to the Directory Server 
database. Following the PRLI, the switch will perform PRLO and LOGO with the device to clean up any 
connection information. VirtualWisdom handles logout frames as destructive and, upon completion of 
the logout, any previously outstanding exchange information will be cleared for the pair of devices based 
upon rules in FC-PH. In addition all of the ITL conversations that were impacted by the logout will have 
the minimum pending exchange set to -1 in the SCSI ITL Metrics. This can help to determine which 
devices participated in the logout. Devices that participate in a logout that do not have any other traffic 
or current pending exchanges will not be flagged with a -1. 

Number  of  Fibre  Channel  Basic  Link  Service  ABTS  frames.  In  Fibre  Channel,  ABTS  frames  are  most 
commonly used to abort exchanges that have either timed out or encountered some other error. Since the 
exchange encountered an error, ABTS is used to terminate the exchange and the Initiator should then 
take appropriate steps to either retry or terminate the exchange. 
ABTS frames usually occur when there are signaling and framing errors (i.e. CRC Errors) present in the 
fabric. Dependent upon the devices, recovery from an ABTS can take anywhere from milliseconds to a 
minute or more. 
ABTS frames can also occur where timeout conditions occur. If a device has an inactive open 
sequence for more than a Sequence Timeout Value (SEQ_TOV), it will generally transmit an ABTS to 
terminate the sequence. However, in many situations the timeout comes following an Upper Layer 
Timeout Value (ULP_TOV). This occurs when single frame sequences (like SCSI Command, Transfer 
Ready, or Status Frames) are lost or delivered with incorrect CRC values. This can also occur when the 
last frame in a sequence is lost or has a bad CRC. The only recourse is to wait for a ULP_TOV and then 
transmit ABTS. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Management Frames (continued) 

Collected Data 

Notifications 

Rejects 

Definition 

Number of Registered State Change Notification (RSCN) frames plus Fabric Address 
Notification (FAN) frames. 
In Fibre Channel, RSCN frames are utilized by a switch or switched fabric to inform devices of changes 
in state that have occurred on other ports or domains of the switch. The RSCN notifies a port that a 
given port, domain or zone has changed state. Typically, a switch will generate an RSCN when a port 
has a Link Reset or Loss of Sync condition. Additionally, the switch will generate an RSCN when devices 
on a port perform FLOGI or register with the Directory Server. This serves as notification to the device 
that receives the RSCN that the communication with an end-point may have been reset or lost. 
Devices must register with the switch to receive RSCN notifications via a State Change Registration 
(SCR). Typically, this is performed by SCSI Initiators and not by SCSI Targets. The logic behind this is that 
an Initiator can control and recover the state of exchanges and pending operations thus leaving the 
Target to have its exchanges “managed” by the Initiator. 
Poor handling of RSCN frames can cause large amounts of disruption in switched fabric environments. 
When a device receives an RSCN frame, it typically goes into a recovery / rediscovery mode to 
determine if communication has been lost or has encountered an error. This recovery can take seconds 
(or worse, MINUTES) with some devices, thus causing other problems on the link like exchange and 
sequence timeouts and dropped frames. There are generally two ways that devices respond to an 
RSCN frame: 

1.    Many devices simply reset their interface via a “Start Of Day” routine, forcing them to blindly 
perform logins and re-initialization with ALL connected devices. This can cause long periods of 
inactivity and recovery. Depending on the number of RSCN frames generated by a switch, this can stop 
the device from functioning completely (i.e. RSCN storms - similar to Multi-Cast storms in Ethernet). 
2.   Devices with sophisticated recovery techniques will examine the RSCN and determine which port 

or ports have been affected, then will verify communication with the specific port (or ports). In this 
situation, the recovery can be smooth and seamless with no or little apparent disruption of normal 
fabric activity. 

It is generally very important to closely monitor the behavior and handling of RSCN frames in a switched 
fabric to ensure timely and accurate handling. 
FAN Frames are commonly utilized erroneously by FL_Ports. If the loop has been in a Loss of Sync 
situation prior to (or during) the Link Reset, FAN should not be utilized by the FL_Port. The Loss of Sync 
could have indicated that a device has been removed or added to the loop, thus causing the potential of 
AL_PA re-addressing on the loop. There are also many situations in which the NL_Ports will initiate a 
loop initialization due to error situations occurring on the loop. In these cases, it may not be safe to 
assume that the previous AL_PA and Fabric Address assignments will be consistent following the loop 
initialization. 

Number of Reject (LS_RJT, BA_RJT, P_RJT, F_RJT) frames. 
The presence of LS_RJT frames in a fabric does not necessarily imply problems or errors within the 
fabric. Each LS_RJT needs to be evaluated for its impact on functionality of the device. 
Link Service Reject frames are utilized as a response to an Extended Link Service Request from another 
device. The device issuing the LS_RJT will include a reason code for the reject in the payload of the 
frame. The most common reason for LS_RJT frames to occur is when a device cannot support a login 
due to insufficient resources 
BA_RJT frames generally occur in response to an ABTS frame that indicates an Exchange ID (OXID) or 
Sequence ID (SEQ_ID) that the device does not have (or no longer has) knowledge of. Typically, this 
happens following a Status transmission from the Target on a SCSI Read, where the Target believes the 
exchange is fine because all frames were transmitted. However, on the receiving end, the Initiator has 
received a CRC or other error in the exchange and transmits ABTS. The ABTS frame arrives at the 
Target AFTER the Status has been delivered. The Target sends BA_RJT, because it is no longer 
cognizant of the exchange 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

Management Frames (continued) 

Collected Data 

Definition 

Rejects (continued) 

Busy 

Accepts 

(F_RJT) or Port Reject (P_RJT) frames are utilized in situations where there is guaranteed delivery in a 
fabric, but a frame is undeliverable. Class 3 service does not utilize Reject Frames, as it is considered 
an unreliable delivery service in which frames can be discarded without notification. 
Fabric Reject Frames generally occur during periods of extreme congestion or when a port has changed 
state via Link Reset or going to a non-participating state due to errors. 
Port Reject Frames generally occur when there are end-to-end credit problems (i.e. ACK problems). 
These normally occur when establishing login states between end-points, but can also occur when a 
device overruns the set limit of end-to-end credits (due to frames being lost or corrupted). 

Number of busy (P_BSY, F_BSY) frames. 
P_BSY Frames are utilized in situations where there is guaranteed delivery in a fabric, but the receiving 
port is temporarily busy and unable to process the frame request. Class 3 service does not utilize 
P_BSY Frames, as it is considered an unreliable delivery service in which frames should be discarded 
without notification. 
F_BSY Frames are utilized in situations where there is guaranteed delivery in a fabric, but the receiving 
port is temporarily busy and unable to process the frame request. Class 3 service does not utilize 
F_BSY Frames, as it is considered an unreliable delivery service in which frames should be discarded 
without notification. 

Number of accept (BA_ACC, ACC) frames 
BA_ACC frames generally occur in response to an ABTS frame that indicates an Exchange ID (OXID) or 
Sequence ID (SEQ_ID) that the device has knowledge of. Some devices retain knowledge of previous 
OXID values until they are re-issued at a later time. In some situations, a device could transmit BA_ACC 
to an exchange that had completed (i.e. SCSI Status transmitted) seconds earlier. In this situation, 
devices will more commonly utilize BA_RJT instead of BA_ACC. 
BA_ACC implies that the device is cognizant of the exchange or sequence referenced by the 
ABTS frames, and that the exchange or sequence has been aborted. 
ACC frames are utilized for a variety of reasons as a response to an ELS Request - such as 
PLOGI, FLOGI, PRLI, etc. 

Loop Initialization Frames 

Number of Loop Initialization frames (LISM, LIFA, LIPA, LIHA, LISA, LIRP, LILP). A single Loop 
Initialization will have many LISM frames and 2 of each other type of frame 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

SCSI Error Frames 

SCSI Error Frames 

Collected Data 

Definition 

Check Condition Status of Frames        Number of SCSI Check Condition Status Frames in this interval. 

Other Bad Status Frames 

Number of SCSI Other Bad Status Frames (Queue Full, Busy, Condition Met, etc.) in this interval. 

Task Management Frames/sec 

Number of SCSI Task Management Frames (Target Reset, LUN Reset, Clear ACA, etc.) 
in this interval. 

SCSI Metrics 

End Device Conversation Information 

End Device Conversation Information 

Collected Data 

Definition 

Initiator 

Name 

Initiator WWN 

Initiator Mft 

Target 

Target Name 

Target WWN 

 

LUN 

LUN Name 

Capacity % 

A device that initiates SCSI Exchanges by sending SCSI commands to specific Target/LUN devices. Initiator 

The name of the device that initiates SCSI Exchanges 

The World Wide Name of the device that initiates SCSI Exchanges.  

The manufacturer of the device that initiates SCSI Exchanges.  

A device that responds to SCSI Commands issued by an Initiator. 

The name of the device that responds to SCSI Commands issued by an Initiator. 

The World Wide Name of the device that responds to SCSI Commands issued by an Initiator. Target Mft

The manufacturer of the device that responds to SCSI Commands issued by an Initiator. 

The Logical Unit Number (LUN) associated with a SCSI Target.  

The name of the LUN associated with a SCSI Target. 

Amount of overall Bus Capacity utilized in FRAME activity per second. Because the SCSI ITL metrics are not 
based on channel the capacity is based on full duplex potential capacity. If a given ITL were performing at 100% 
reads, but no writes, the capacity would be 50%. In order to achieve 100% capacity the ITLs would have to be 
reading and writing at full capacity. 

Frames/Sec 

Total number of frames of any type per second. 

MB/Sec 
 
 

Total megabytes of frame payload data per second. Does not include the SOF, Header, CRC, or EOF. 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

End Device Conversation Information (continued) 

Collected Data 

Task Management 
Frames/Sec 

#Other Bad Status 
Frames 

#Check Condition 
Status Frames 

Minimum Pending 
Exchanges 

Maximum Pending 
Exchanges 

Current Pending 
Exchanges 

Read/Write/Other 
Data Frames/sec 

Read/Write/Other 
Data MB/sec 

Definition 
 
Number of SCSI Task Management Frames (Target Reset, LUNReset, Clear ACA, etc.) in this interval. Number of 

SCSI Other Bad Status Frames (Queue Full, Busy Condition Met, etc.) in this interval. Number of SCSI Check 

Condition Status Frames in this interval. 

The minimum number of exchanges that were pending at any time during the interval. The minimum value 
includes any exchanges that were opened in previous intervals that have not yet closed. 
The minimum pending exchange can also help in determining which devices were impacted or 
involved in many of the Fibre Channel Link Events. The minimum Pending Exchange will be negative one if the 
there is traffic for an ITL in an interval where the exchanges are reset. 
The following events will reset the Pending Exchange Counts for all ITLs with a specific T, regardless 
of I or L: 
Event counter - Task Mgmt Fr/Sec: 
Target  Reset,  Clear  Task  Set,  Abort  Task  Set  FC 
Logout Events (Event counter - Logouts): TPRLO 
- Third Party Process Logout 

The following events will reset the Pending Exchange Counts for all ITLs with a specific IT, regardless of L: 
Event counter - Logins: 
PLOGI - Port Login, FLOGI-Fabric Login, PRLI- Process Login, PDISC- Discover N_Port Service 
Parameters, FDISC- Discover F_Port Service Parameters, ADISC - Discover Address. Event 
counter - Logouts: 
LOGO- N_Port Logout,PRLO -Process Logout 
The following events will reset the Pending Exchange Counts for all ITLs with a specific TL, regardless of I: 
Event counter - Task Mgmt Fr/Sec: 
Logical Unit Reset 
 
The following events will reset the Pending Exchange Counts for all ITLs regardless of I, T, or L: Event 
counter - Link Up Events: 
Link Up. 
 
The maximum number of exchanges that were pending at any time during the interval. The maximum value 
includes any exchanges that were opened in previous intervals that have not yet closed. 
 
The number of exchanges that were open in this or previous intervals that had not been closed by the end of the 
interval. 
 
Total number of SCSI Read/Write/Other Data frames per second. 
 
 
Total Megabytes of payload data in SCSI Read/Write/Other Data frames per second. Does not include the SOF, 
Header, CRC or EOF. 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Statistics for Completed Read/Write/Other SCSI Exchanges 

Statistics for Completed Read/Write/Other SCSI Exchanges 

Collected Data 

Definition 

Read/Write/Other Commands Issued 

Total Read/Write/Other Exchange 
Completion Time (ms) 
Min Read/Write/Other Size 

Max Read/Write/Other Size 

Min Read/Write/Other Exchange 
Completion Time (ms) 

Max Read/Write/Other Exchange 
Completion Time (ms) 

Total number of SCSI Read/Write/Other Command frames issued in this interval. 
 
Total time for all the SCSI Read/Write/Other Exchange Commands that completed in this 
interval. 

Minimum number of data bytes requested for any SCSI Read/Write/Other Exchange that 
completed in this interval. 

Maximum number of data bytes requested for any SCSI Read/Write/Other Exchange that 
completed in this interval. 
 
Minimum amount of elapsed time (in milliseconds) for any SCSI Read/Write/Other 
Exchange that completed in this interval. 
 
Maximum amount of elapsed time (in milliseconds) for any SCSI Read/Write/Other 
Exchange that completed in this interval. 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fibre Channel Link Statistics 

This is a group of statistics and counts of events that occur within a sample. These counts are derived on a Channel 
basis, not utilizing the S_ID/D_ID or I/T/L values. The following provides a definition of terms and counter definitions for all 
Fibre Channel Link Statistics 

FC Link Statistics Definitions 

Fibre Channel Link Statistic Definitions 

Statistic 

Frames/sec. 
MB/sec. 

Application Data 
Frames/sec. 
MB/sec. 

SCSI Frames/sec. 
MB/sec. 

Management 
Frames/sec. 
MB/sec. 

Other Frames/sec. 
MB/sec. 

Bus Capacity 

Definition 
 
An accumulation of all Payload Data occurring for any frame on the wire, regardless of R_CTL or 
TYPE field. 
 
Application Data is defined as the amount of Payload Data occurring in frames that have an 
R_CTL = 0x01 or 0x04. 
 
 
SCSI Data is defined as the amount of Payload Data occurring in frames that have TYPE = 0x08 (FCP-
SCSI) or 0x09 (GPP-SCSI). 
 
The definition for management frames is as follows: 
Extended Fibre Channel Link Services - Any Extended Fibre Channel Link Service (ELS) frame is defined as: 
Type = 0x01, R_CTL = Any, except: 
LISM Frames, Type = 0x01, R_CTL = 0x22, P/L Data 0 = 1101xxxx ECHO 
Frames, Type = 0x01, R_CTL = 0x22, P/L Data 0 = 1100xxxx TEST Frames, 
Type = 0x01, R_CTL = 0x22, P/L Data 0 = 10xxxxxx 
This broad definition catches all FLOGI, PLOGI, PRLI, ACC, LIFA, LIHA, LISA, LIPA, LILP, LIRP, 
RSCN frames and all relevant / interesting ELS frames. 
Fibre Channel Services - Any of the Fibre Channel Services (FCS) type frames – defined by Type 
= 0x20, 0x21, 0x22, 0x23 and 0x24, R_CTL = Any. 
This definition catches all Directory Server Management frames and FC-AL Management frames. 
Fabric Frames - Any frame containing a SOF(f) delimiter. 
All ISL (Inter-Switch Fibre Channel Link) connections pass management / operational frames using SOF(f) 
delimiters on the frames. These frames will overlap somewhat with the definition of ELS and FCS, but 
should be fairly simple to “weed out” duplicates. Many of these frames have proprietary decodes and data 
based upon the manufacturer of the switch. 
 
Basic Fibre Channel Link Services – the Basic Fibre Channel Link Services (BLS) frames are defined as: 
R_CTL = 0x80 – 0x8F – NOP, ABTS, RMC, BA_ACC, BA_RJT, PRMT 
Fibre Channel Link Control Frames - Any non-ACK Fibre Channel Link Control (LC) frame defined as: 
R_CTL = 0xC2 – 0xC8 P_RJT, P_BST, F_RJT, F_BSY, LCR, NTY 
 
Other Data is defined as the amount of Payload Data occurring in frames that are NEITHER 
Management or SCSI frames. 

Bus Capacity is a representation of throughput over the total throughput capacity of the Fibre Channel 
Link. This can be calculated from the data rate (MB/sec.) and the potential data rate in MB/sec. of the 
Fibre Channel Link. The term Capacity is used to alleviate confusion when future versions of the FQS 
product implement Bus Utilization statistics. 

Code Violations 

A bit error is defined as any Code Violation, Disparity Error, Unframed Data, etc. These should match the 
counts provided in the GTX Performance Monitor. 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Fibre Channel Link Statistic Definitions (continued) 

Statistic 

Definition 

CRC Frame Errors 

Loss of Signal Event 

Loss of Sync Event 

LIP Event 

NOS/OLS Event 

Fibre Channel Link Up 
Event 

A frame error is defined as any frame with a embedded Code Violation or Disparity Error (again mirroring 
the qualification for the VirtualWisdom probe hardware). In addition, this should include ANY frame that is 
terminated with an EOFa, EOFni, or EOFdti delimiter. 

Qualified by FCMAC or physical layer - indicated loss of light (i.e. GBIC removed). Generated by 
Fibre Channel Link Engine and delivered to Frame Engine as Fibre Channel Link Status Event. 

Loss of disparity for 3 or more words. Generated by Fibre Channel Link Engine and delivered to 
Frame Engine as Fibre Channel Link Status Event. 

any FCAL LIP primitive. Generated by Fibre Channel Link Engine and delivered to Frame Engine as Fibre 
Channel Link Status Event. 

any Fibre Channel NOS or OLS primitive. Generated by Fibre Channel Link Engine and delivered to Frame 
Engine as Fibre Channel Link Status Event. 
 
any run of 3 or more Idle primitives following any of the Fibre Channel Link Down events listed above 
(LIP, OLS/NOS, LOS, LOSIG). 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FC Device Metrics 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Collected Data  

Link Reset Events  

 

 

CRC Errors (previously included 
in Frame Errors metric) 

Bad EOF (previously included in 
Frame Errors metric)  

Other Frame Errors (previously 
included in Frame Errors metric)  

 

Time spent at zero buffer-to-
buffer credit  

 

Min buffer-to-buffer credit  

Max buffer-to-buffer credit  
VFT Frames  

IFR Frames  

Enc Frames  

Min Pending Exchanges  

Avg Read Size (bytes)  

Avg Write Size (bytes)  

Definition  

Number of times primitive sequences LR or LRR events have been seen. This is not a count of 
the number of actual LR/LRR primitives, but the number of sequences of these events. 

 

The count of CRC errors.  

 

The count of frames received with EOFa, EOFni, or EOFdti. 

 

Framing errors that can occur on any link with media or transmission problems. The framing 
errors checked for include: missing SOF/EOF values, and improperly truncated frames (jabber o  
runt frames). 

Time in milliseconds at min B2B credit. Can look at the max outstanding frame seen by probe, 
and then compare by outstanding exchanges on device. Decreased with frames and increased 
by Rready.  

Minimum value of the B2B credit during the interval.  

Maximum value of the B2B credit during the interval.  

Number of frames with Virtual Fabric Tagging headers in this interval.  

Number of frames with Inter-Fabric Routing headers in this interval.  

Number of frames with Encapsulation headers in this interval.  
The minimum number of SCSI exchanges open at one time during this interval.  

Average read exchange size in megabytes for exchanges completed in this interval.  

Average write exchange size in megabytes for exchanges completed in this interval.  

Avg Write Cmd to First Response 
Time (ms)  

Average amount of elapsed time from the SCSI write command to the first read for any 
exchange completed in this interval.  

Min Write Cmd to First Response 
Time (ms)  

Minimum amount of elapsed time from the SCSI write command to the first read for any 
exchange completed in this interval.  

Max Write Cmd to First Response 
Time (ms)  

Maximum amount of elapsed time from the SCSI write command to the first read for any 
exchange completed in this interval.  

Avg Other Size (bytes)  

Average write exchange size in megabytes for exchanges completed in this interval. 

Avg Other Cmd to First Response 
Time (ms)  

Average amount of elapsed time from the SCSI other command to the first response for any 
exchange completed in this interval.  

Min Other Cmd to First Response 
Time (ms)  

 

Max Other Cmd to First 
Response Time (ms) 

 

  
 

Minimum amount of elapsed time from the SCSI other command to the first response for any 
exchange completed in this interval.  

Maximum amount of elapsed time from the SCSI other command to the first response for any 
exchange completed in this interval. 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
VirtualWisdom SAN Availability Probe model ProbeSW Metrics 
 

Port Information 

Port Information returned by each ProbeV 

Port Information 

Port WWN 

Number 

Manufacturer 

Link Rate 

Nickname 

FCID 

Supported Port Type 

NL, N, FL, F, E, TE Port 

FL, F, E, TE 

NL, N, FL, F, E, TE 

NL, N, FL, F, E, TE 

NL, N 

NL, N, [FL] 

MIB Metrics 

Note: Some switch manufacturers may use 32 bit counters for counters that are designed as 
64 bit in the MIB, which may cause data anomalies, such as unknown or -1 values, when the counters 
wrap inconsistently. 

The FCFE MIB defines all transmit and receive counters as 64 bit and all error counters as 32 bit. The FA 
MIB defines all counters as 64 bit. Table below lists MIB data generated by ProbeSW. 

Fibre Channel Metrics from ProbeSW 

Metric 

Received "bytes" 
Transmitted "bytes" 

Received frames 
Transmitted frames 

CRC Errors (receive 
channel only) 

Use 
 
Determine if a port is running, or that 
data is getting to a port. This is also 
used in the Utilization Screen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Find out how many bytes per frame 
you are getting  and gauge how 
bandwidth is being used or the relative 
use of bandwidth setup overhead. 
 
Usually indicates likelihood of a 
physical problem on the link. 

Description 

MIB 
 
FCFE  MIB  The  number  of  Class  3  frame  octets,  including  the 
frame delimiters, received or transmitted by this port 
from its attached Nx_Port. 

 
FA MIB 

The number of octets or bytes that have been 
received or transmitted by this port. One second 
periodic polling of the port. This value is saved and 
compared with the next polled value to compute 
net throughput. Ordered sets are not included in the 
count. 

 
FCFE MIB      The number of Class 3 frames received or 

FA MIB 

FA MIB 

transmitted by this port from or to its attached 
Nx_Port. 

Count of Frames received or transmitted by this 
port. 

Count of frames received with invalid CRC. 
This count is part of the Link Error Status Block 
(LESB). (FC-PH 29.8). Loop ports should not count 
CRC errors passing through when monitoring. 

 
FCFE MIB      The number of invalid CRCs detected by the FC-

Port. Loop ports should not count CRC errors 
passing through when monitoring. 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

  

Fibre Channel Metrics from ProbeSW 

Metric 

Link Resets Received 
Link Resets Transmitted 

Use 
 
Usually indicates a credit reset which 
may be due to a credit balance 
problem between a device and a 
switch. This may also be a result of a 
reboot or cable pull. 

MIB 
 
FA MIB 

Description 

Count of Link resets. This is the number of LRs 
received/transmitted. 

FCFE MIB      The number of link reset protocol errors 

received/issued by the FC-Port from/to the 
attached FC-port. 
The number of Link reset responses received/ 
transmitted by the FC-port 

Count of link failures. This count is part of the 
Link Error Status Block (LESB). (FC-PH 29.8). 

Link Failures 

Usually indicates server is rebooting or 
is otherwise inaccessible. 

 
FA MIB 

Loss of Signal 

Indicates light loss due to a cable or 
GBIC problem, or a reset by HBA, or a 
disk time-out.  Correlate errors with 
HBA logs to determine cause; in NT 
event logs it says SCSI reset. 

Loss of Sync 

Usually indicates incompatible link 
speeds on connected ports. 

Class3Discards (receive 
channel only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Buffer to buffer credit 
(BBC) transition from zero 
(transmit channel only)  
 
Note: This metric uses the 
data from the switch and 
converts it to a rate per 
second; this rate is 
averaged over the 
configured poll interval for 
ProbeSW. 
 
 
 

 
Usually indicates traffic so heavy that 
it causes the switch to discard 
packets. 
 
 
 
 
 
Used to manage the buffer-to-buffer 
flow control of frames. The zero state 
indicates that the port is out of 
credits.  
 
Vendor-specific implementations: 
Cisco: the number of times the port 
exits from the zero BBC state. 
Brocade: the number of 2.5 
microsecond intervals spent at the 
zero BBC state. 
 
 
 
 

 
FCFE MIB      The number of link failures detected by the 

FC-Port. 

 
FA MIB 

Count of instances of signal loss detected at port. 
This count is part of the Link Error Status Block 
(LESB). (FC-PH 29.8). 

 
FCFE MIB      The number of signal losses detected by the 

FC-Port. 

 
FA MIB 

Count of instances of synchronization loss 
detected at port. This count is part of the Link 
Error Status Block (LESB). (FC-PH 29.8). 

 
FCFE MIB      The number of loss of synchronization failures 

detected  by the FC-Port. 

 
FCFE MIB      Count of Class 3 Frames that were discarded upon 

reception at this port.  There is no FBSY or FRJT 
generated for Class 3 Frames.  They are simply 
discarded if they cannot be delivered. Note, this is 
a Fibre Channel only stat. 

FA MIB 

The number of Class 3 frames discarded by this 
port. 

FCFE MIB     The number of transitions of BBC out of zero 

      state. 

       Count of transitions in/out of BBC zero state. 

The other side is not providing any credit. Note, this is 
a Fibre Channel only stat. 

 
FA MIB  

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

ProbeSW LED Information 

The ProbeSW channels are: 

Probe LED Information 

LED label 
CRC 
 

 
DIS 
 

 
LR 
 

 
LF 
 

 
LOS 
 

 
SIG 
 

 

Color 
Red 
Yellow 

Green 
Red 
Yellow 

Green 
Red 
Yellow 

Green 
Red 
Yellow 

Green 
Red 
Yellow 

Green 
Red 
Yellow 

Green 

Definition 
CRC errors >1 after the last poll 
CRC has occurred since it was last reset but is not present in the current interval 

No CRC errors detected since last reset 
Class 3 Discards >1 after the last poll 
Class 3 Discards have occurred since it was last reset but is not present in the 
current interval 
No Class 3 Discards detected since last reset 
Link Resets >1 after the last poll 
Link Resets have occurred since it was last reset but is not present in the current 
interval 
No Link Resets detected since last reset 
Link Failures >1 after the last poll 
Link Failures have occurred since it was last reset but is not present in the 
current interval 
No Link Failures detected since last reset 
Loss of Sync errors >1 after the last poll 
Loss of Sync errors have occurred since it was last reset but is not 
present in the current interval 
No Loss of Sync errors detected since last reset 
Loss of Signal errors >1 after the last poll 
Loss of Signal errors have occurred since it was last reset but is not 
present in the current interval 
No Loss of Signal errors detected since last reset 

Click Reset on a ProbeSW configuration dialog to reset all LEDs. 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
VirtualWisdom Virtual Server Probe model ProbeVM metrics 

Each instance of a ProbeVM corresponds to a single Virtual Center Server with metrics collection available on a per server and virtual machine 
basis. The frequency of metric collection can be set to 20 seconds, 1 minute or 5 minutes (default).  The two metrics sets for ProbeVM are Server 
and Virtual Machine. These metric sets are organized into five groups starting with Context Metrics that include the container key fields, unique 
VirtualWisdom calculated metrics, and hardware rate settings. There are four other groups that include CPU, Memory, Disk, Network and Other 
Metrics that derive from similar groupings in Virtual Center. 

Note: Virtual Center metrics are polled from ESX / ESXi servers on a VMware-specific poll interval. 

Calculated Network Virtual Machine Metrics 

Disk IO Utilization % - The average Disk IO Utilization percentage of total Server HBA capacity. Calculation is Avg Disk Usage / Server HBA 
Capacity where:  

• 
• 

Avg Disk Usage = Disk Read Rate + Disk Write Rate 
Total HBA Link Capacity = Sum of HBA Link Rates from HBA ports 

Network Utilization % - The average Network Utilization percentage of total Server NIC capacity. Calculation is Avg Net Usage / Total NIC 
Capacity where:  

• 
• 

Avg Network Data Rate = Network Data Transmit Rate + Network Data Receive Rate 
 Total NIC Capacity = Sum of NIC Speeds from NIC card Ports 

Composite Utilization % - A combination index that shows the average percentage of total Server capacity for four dimensions of resource 
usage including CPU, Memory, Disk IO, and Network. Calculation is (Disk IO Utilization % + Network Utilization % + CPU Usage % + Memory 
Usage %) / 4 

Max Composite Utilization % - The maximum total Server capacity resource observed for the four dimensions of resource usage including 
CPU, Memory, Disk IO and Network. Calculation is Max (Disk IO Utilization, Network Utilization %, CPU Usage %, Memory Usage %) 
 

Context Virtual Machine Metrics 

Virtual Machine 

 The name of the Virtual Machine being measured. 

Server 

Cluster 

 The name of the Server being measured. 

 The name of the Cluster being measured 

Total HBA Link Capacity (Gb/s) 

 The total Host Bus Adapter link capacity (Gb/s). This is used to calculate Disk IO Utilization %. 

Total NIC Capacity (Mb/s) 

 The total Network Interface Card Capacity (Mb/s).  This is used to calculate Network Utilization 
%. 

Disk IO Utilization % 

Network Utilization 

Composite Utilization 

 The average Disk IO Utilization percentage of total Server HBA capacity 

 % The average Network Utilization percentage of total Server NIC capacity. 

 % A combination index that shows the average percentage of total Server capacity for four 
dimensions of resource usage including CPU, Memory, Disk IO, and Network. 

Max Composite Utilization % 

 The maximum total Server capacity resource observed for the four dimensions of resource usage 

CPU Virtual Machine Metrics 

  

 

CPU Extra (ms) 

CPU time (ms) that is extra. 

CPU Guaranteed (ms) 

CPU time (ms) that is guaranteed. 

CPU Ready (ms) 

CPU System (ms) 

CPU Usage % 

CPU Usage (MHz)  

CPU Used (ms) 

CPU Wait (ms) 

CPU time (ms) spent in ready state. 

CPU time (ms) spent on system processes 

CPU usage as a percentage over the collected interval. 

CPU usage in MHz over the collected interval. For hosts this can be represented on a per Virtual 
Machine basis as a stacked graph. 

CPU time (ms) that is used. 

CPU time (ms) spent in wait state. 

Avg CPU Active % (5 min.) 

CPU active average % over 5 minute 

Max CPU Active % (5 min.) 

CPU active peak over 5 minute  

Max CPU Throttled % (5 min.) 

Amount of CPU resources over the limit that were refused, average over 5 minute 

Avg CPU Running % (5 min.) 

CPU running average over 5 minute 

Max CPU Running % (5 min.) 

CPU running peak over 5 minute 

 
 

 

 
 
Memory Virtual Machine Metrics 

Memory Active (KB) 

Memory Consumed (KB) 

Memory Granted (KB) 

Memory Overhead (KB) 

Memory Shared (KB)  

Memory Swap In (KB) 

Memory Swap Out (KB) 

Amount of memory that is actively used (KB). 

Amount of host memory (KB) consumed by the virtual machine for guest memory. 

Amount of memory (KB) granted. For hosts this can be represented on a per Virtual Machine basis as 
a stacked graph. 

Amount of additional host memory (KB) allocated to the virtual machine. 

Amount of memory (KB) that is shared. 
Amount of memory (KB) that is swapped in. Occurs when the server reads from page file (“disk”) to 
volatile memory 
Amount of memory (KB) that is swapped out. Occurs when the server writes from memory to page 
file ("disk") 

Memory Swapped (KB) 

Amount of memory (KB) that is swapped. 

Memory Swap Target (KB) 

Amount of memory (KB) that can be swapped. 

Memory Usage % 

Memory Balloon (KB) 

Memory usage as percentage of total configured or available memory. 

Amount of memory (KB) used by memory control. 

Memory Balloon Target (KB) 

Amount of memory (KB) that can be used by memory control. 

Memory Zero (KB) 

Amount of memory (KB) that is zeroed out. 

Disk Virtual Machine Metrics 

Disk Bus Resets 

Disk Commands Issued 

Disk Command Aborts 

Disk Read Requests 

Disk Write Requests 

Disk Read Rate (KB/s) 

Disk Usage (KB/s) 

Number of bus resets in the period. 

Number of disk commands issued in the period. 

Number of disk commands aborted in the period. 

Number of disk reads in the period. 

Number of disk writes in the period. 

Rate of reading data from the disk (KB/s). 

Aggregated storage performance statistics (KB/s). For hosts this can be represented on a per Virtual 
Machine basis as a stacked graph. 

Disk Write Rate (KB/s) 

Rate of writing data to the disk (KB/s). 

Network Virtual Machine Metrics 

Network Packets Received 

Number of packets received in the period. 

Network Packets Transmitted 

Number of packets transmitted in the period. 

Network Data Receive Rate (KB/s) 

Rate at which data is received (KB/s). 

Network Data Transmit Rate (KB/s) 

Rate at which data is transmitted (KB/s). 

Network Usage (KB/s) 

Aggregated network performance statistics (KB/s). For hosts this can be represented on a per 
Virtual Machine basis as a stacked graph. 

Other Virtual Machine Metrics 

Avg CPU Active (1 min.) 

CPU active average over 1 minute. 

Max CPU Active % (1 min.) 

CPU active peak over 1 minute. 

Max CPU Throttled % (1 min.) 

Amount of CPU resources over the limit that were refused, average over 1 minute. 

Avg CPU Running % (1 min.) 

CPU running average over 1 minute. 

Max CPU Running % (1 min.) 

CPU running peak over 1 minute. 

Group CPU Sample Count 

Group CPU sample count. 

Group CPU Sample Period (ms) 

Group CPU sample period (ms). 

Heartbeat 

Number of heartbeats in this period. 

Resource CPU Usage (MHz) 

Resource CPU usage (MHz). 

Uptime (sec) 

Total time (sec) elapsed since last startup 

Context Server Metrics 

Server 
 

The name of the Server/host being measured.  

 

 
 
Cluster 

The name of the Cluster being measured.  

Total HBA Link Capacity (Gb/s) 

The total Host Bus Adapter link capacity (Gb/s). This is used to calculate Disk IO 
Utilization %. 

Total NIC Capacity (Mb/s) 

Network Interface Card Speed (Mb/s). 

Disk IO Utilization % 

Network Utilization % 

Composite Utilization % 

The average Disk IO Utilization percentage of total Server HBA capacity. 

The average Network Utilization percentage of total Server NIC capacity. 

A combination index that shows the average percentage of total Server capacity for four 
dimensions of resource usage including CPU, Memory, Disk IO, and Network. 

Max Composite Utilization % 

 The maximum total Server capacity resource observed for the four dimensions of 
resource usage including CPU, Memory, Disk IO, and Network. 

CPU Server Metrics 

CPU Idle (ms) 

CPU time (ms) spent in idle state. 

CPU Reserved Capacity (MHz) 

Total CPU capacity (MHz) reserved by the virtual machines. 

CPU Usage % 

CPU Usage (MHz) 

CPU usage as a percentage over the collected interval. 

CPU usage (MHz) over the collected interval. For hosts this can be represented on a per 
Virtual Machine basis as a stacked graph. 

CPU Used (ms) 

CPU time (ms) that is used 

Avg CPU Active % (5 min.) 

CPU active average % over 5 minute 

Max CPU Active % (5 min.) 

CPU active peak over 5 minute Max CPU Throttled % (5 min.) 3 Amount of CPU 
resources over the limit that were refused, average over 5 minute 

Avg CPU Running % (5 min.) 

CPU running average over 5 minute 

Max CPU Running % (5 min.) 

CPU running peak over 5 minute 

Memory Server Metrics 

Avg Memory Active (KB) 

Avg Memory Granted (KB) 

Amount of memory (KB) that is actively used. 

Amount of memory granted (KB). For hosts this can be represented on a per Virtual 
Machine basis as a stacked graph. 

Avg Memory Heap (KB) 

Amount of memory (KB) allocated for heap. 

Avg Memory Heap Free (KB) 

Free space in memory heap (KB). 

Avg Memory Overhead (KB) 

Amount of additional host memory (KB) allocated to the virtual machine. 

Memory Reserved Capacity (KB) 

Amount of memory (KB) reserved by the virtual machines. 

Avg Memory Shared (KB) 

Amount of memory (KB) that is shared. 

Avg Memory Shared Common (KB) 

Amount of memory (KB) that is shared by common. 

Memory State 

Memory state. 

Avg Memory Swap In (KB) 

Amount of memory (KB) that is swapped in. 

Avg Memory Swap Out (KB) 

Amount of memory (KB) that is swapped out. 

Avg Memory Swap Used (KB) 

Amount of memory (KB) that is used by swap. 

Avg Memory Unreserved (KB) 

Amount of memory (KB) that is unreserved. 

Memory Usage % 

Avg Memory Zero (KB) 

Memory usage as percentage of total configured or available memory. 

Amount of memory (KB) that is zeroed out. 

Avg Memory Consumed (KB) 

Amount of host memory (KB) consumed by the virtual machine for guest memory 

Avg Memory Balloon (KB) 

Amount of memory (KB) used by memory control 

Disk Virtual Machine Metrics 

Disk Bus Resets 

Disk Commands Issued 

Disk Command Aborts 

Avg Physical Device Command Latency 
(ms) 

Avg Physical Device Read Latency (ms) 
 

Number of bus resets in the period. 

Number of disk commands issued in the period. 

Number of disk commands aborted in the period. 

The average time (ms) taken to complete a command from the physical device. 

The average time (ms) taken to complete a read from the physical device. 

 

 
 
Avg Physical Device Write Latency (ms) 

The average time (ms) taken to complete a write from the physical device. 

Avg Kernel Disk Command Latency (ms) 

The average time (ms) spent in ESX Server VMKernel per command. 

Avg Kernel Disk Read Latency (ms) 

The average time (ms) spent in ESX Server VMKernel per read. 

Avg Kernel Disk Write Latency (ms) 

The average time (ms) spent in ESX Server VMKernel per write. 

Disk Read Requests 

Disk Write Requests 

Number of disk reads in the period. 

Number of disk writes in the period. 

Avg Queue Command Latency (ms) 

The average time (ms) spent in the ESX Server VMKernel queue per command. 

Avg Queue Read Latency (ms) 

The average time (ms) spent in the ESX Server VMKernel queue per read. 

Avg Queue Write Latency (ms) 

The average time (ms) spent in the ESX Server VMKernel queue per write. 

Disk Read Rate (KB/s) 

Rate of reading data from the disk (KB/s). 

Avg Disk Command Latency (ms) 

The average amount of time (ms) taken for a command from the perspective of a Guest 
OS. This is the sum of Kernel Command Latency and Physical Device Command Latency. 

Avg Disk Read Latency (ms) 

Avg Disk Write Latency (ms) 

Disk Usage (KB/s) 

The average amount of time (ms) taken for a read from the perspective of a Guest OS. 
This is the sum of Kernel Read Latency and Physical Device Read Latency. 

The average amount of time (ms) taken for a write from the perspective of a Guest OS. 
This is the sum of Kernel Write Latency and Physical Device Write Latency. 

Aggregated storage performance statistics (KB/s). For hosts this can be represented on a 
per Virtual Machine basis as a stacked graph. 

Disk Write Rate (KB/s) 

Rate of writing data to the disk (KB/s). 

Max Disk Command Latency (ms) 

The highest latency value across all disks used by the host 

Network Server Metrics 

Network Packets Received 

Number of packets received in the period. 

Network Packets Transmitted 

Number of packets transmitted in the period. 

Network Data Receive Rate (KB/s) 

Rate at which data is received (KB/s). 

Network Data Transmit Rate (KB/s) 

Rate at which data is transmitted (KB/s). 

Network Usage (KB/s) 

Aggregated network performance statistics (KB/s). For hosts this can be represented on a 
per Virtual Machine basis as a stacked graph. 

Network Receive Packets Dropped 

Number of receive packets dropped in the period 

Network Transmit Packets Dropped 

Number of transmit packets dropped in the period 

Other Server Metrics 

Avg Resource CPU Usage (MHz) 

Resource CPU usage (MHz). 

Total time (sec) elapsed since last startup. 

Fairness of distributed cpu resource allocation 

Aggregate available memory resources of all hosts within a cluster 

Uptime (sec) 

CPU Fairness 

Memory Fairness 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

Corporate Headquarters 
25 Metro Drive Suite 400 
San Jose, CA 95110 
Phone:  408-579-4000 
Fax:  408-579-4001 

Sales 
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Phone:  408-579-4081 

Support 
support@virtualinstruments.com 
 

©2012 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are 
trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or 
servicemarks of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 02/22/12 

 

