VMware Horizon Advantages over Citrix 

Based on five key factors for 
measuring the effectiveness of 
VDI solutions, GigaOm Research 
awarded VMware the top rating 
in their “Sector RoadMap: virtual 
desktops in 2014.”  
 
VMware won out over Citrix, 
Microsoft, Dell, and Amazon. 
 

VMware

4.6

Citrix
4.4

Microsoft
4.0

Dell
2.8

Amazon
2.4

Virtual Desktop Platforms

Mobile and cloud deployment issues are dominating the minds of organizations today. 
End-user mobility and flexibility versus IT control and visibility are the opposing 
requirements challenging even the most nimble of environments. Organizations are 
searching for several key capabilities to address this dichotomy:

•	Infrastructure that is optimized for end users to drive down costs, simplify acquisition, 

upgrade easily, and support policy management

•	Flexibility in delivering workspaces to users—on–premises, cloud, and offline—all within a 

unified workspace

•	Management capabilities encompassing the entire ecosystem and providing security, 

compliance, and management of day-to-day end-user environments

VMware addresses these needs better than others, such as Citrix, with a Mobile-Cloud 
architecture tailored to the specific needs of end-user mobility and IT management. 

APP

Real-Time
Application 

Delivery

Policy

Management

User 

Environment
Management

End-to-End
Monitoring

Workspace Environment  
Management  
 for lower OpEx

On Premises

Cloud

Hybrid

O(cid:31)ine

Flexible Delivery   
for the best  
end-user experience

Compute

Network

Storage

Trusted Platform  
optimized for EUC and 
hyper-converged

Figure 1: VMware Mobile-Cloud Architecture

s

l
a
u
t
r
i
V

p
o
t
k
s
e
D

m
r
o
f
t
a
l
P

      One Trusted Platform for the Entire Organization 
Most IT administrators, if given the choice, would prefer to use one platform throughout 
their environment and not spend time installing and managing separate management 
infrastructures. With VMware, they can do that. The VMware Software-Defined Data 
Center (SDDC) is the only platform optimized for VMware End-User Computing (EUC) 
products. A single platform provides the following unique advantages:

•	Reduced CapEx and streamlined management 

•	Trusted brand with the leading stats for reliability, performance, robustness, and security

•	Reduced support costs and increased uptime

The industry’s leading virtualization platform marries three critical technologies under one 
umbrella: compute, storage, and networking. This powerful trio provides tailored 
integration with EUC, resulting in real benefits for customers including reduced storage 

1

“VMware won us over with their 
depth of knowledge about 
end-user computing. They were 
able to articulate a clear vision 
for enterprise space desktop 
virtualization.” 
–  Kevin Moll,  

Desktop Operations Manager, 
Foley

vRealize Operations 
for Horizon

Root Cause
Analysis

Proactive
Maintenance

Reactive Problem
Solving

vSphere 
Infrastructure 
System Metrics

Compliance
Reporting

Citrix

Citrix Director/
HDX Insight

Citrix Desktop
Environment

costs by up to 50 percent, simplified network provisioning and micro-segmentation, and 
extensive 3D graphics support that includes vGPU with NVIDIA, vSGA, and vDGA.

VMware leads in innovation with hyper-converged architectures EVO: RAIL™ and  
EVO: RACK™ providing the lowest cost on-premises and cloud-based implementation 
options while reducing complexity and cost on a unified platform for VDI and Application 
Publishing.

Citrix was not built from the ground up to support the VMware SDDC (VMware vSphere®, 
VMware Virtual SAN™, and VMware NSX™) and they typically lag in support for key 
innovations in the platform. VMware EUC was built with integration points that provide 
cost savings in storage, compute, and networking infrastructure.  

      Flexible Delivery for the Best End-User Experience
End users simply don’t want to be tied to a computer during their entire workday. They need 
multiple places and types of workspaces for maximum productivity and satisfaction. To 
address this demand, VMware Horizon® delivers the broadest set of workspaces in the industry, 
including: applications, hosted applications, persistent desktops, non-persistent desktops, just-
in-time desktops, and hosted desktops. Horizon also provides the only true hybrid delivery 
system with VMware Horizon Air™. Horizon and Horizon Air together allow organizations to 
deploy their VDI infrastructure on-premises, in the cloud, or a hybrid of the two. 

For offline users who are not always connected to the network, Horizon FLEX™ provides 
the endpoint security and central management needed to effectively support offline users 
who can’t get to the network every time they need to work. 

Citrix doesn’t offer this same breadth of support. They are limited in not having a true 
DaaS offering, don’t have a full hybrid deployment option for on-premises/cloud, and 
don’t offer just-in-time desktops that leverage the vmFork and VMware App Volumes™ 
capabilities. VMware offers all of these capabilities, with just-in-time desktops  
coming soon. 

     Workspace Environment Management
Only VMware provides a management platform that spans across end-user needs from 
application management, image and desktop management, through policy management, 
security, and compliance to monitoring and automation. Whether the need is to manage 
workspaces, control access, deliver applications, or meet security and compliance 
requirements, the extensive management capabilities offered by VMware provide more 
control and visibility than other, more restricted products.

Only VMware provides end-to-end application and workspace management that 
encompasses the following capabilities: 

•	App isolation – Containerized applications that are isolated from the operating system

•	App delivery – Delivering applications to virtual desktops in real-time

•	App access – Single sign-on access to all apps and services through a unified workspace

•	App monitoring – In-guest metrics for app performance monitoring

•	User Environment Management – Provides consistent, personalized, and dynamic 

desktop experience across all devices

•	Image management with built-in disaster recovery

VMware App Volumes provides real-time application management that eases the burden 
of getting the right apps to the right people, throughout the applications’ lifecycle. From 
creation to delivery through updates and into retirement, App Volumes provides the only 

2

VMware Horizon Advantages over Citrix “By virtualizing our server and 
desktop estate with VMware, 
we’ve cut costs, dramatically 
simplified our IT infrastructure, 
and transformed how we support 
over 1,000 desktops in our 
service center in Dublin.”
–  Paul Bermingham,  
Staff Vice President, 
Information Technology 
Services, Hertz International

                                “VMware  
                                pretty much  
                                ran over the  
                                competition.”

real-time application management and delivery solution. Citrix’s PvD only supports pooled 
static VDI; it cannot be assigned per user, it doesn’t support physical desktops, and it 
doesn’t support XenApp. VMware App Volumes provides all this functionality and more. 

VMware User Environment Management (UEM) allows desktop and application virtualization 
users to maintain consistent personalized settings—such as desktop wallpaper and browser 
bookmarks—from session to session and from one device to another. UEM provides VMware 
customers with a consistent and dynamic desktop experience that is independent of operating 
system, device, and location, enabling true “business mobility.”

Citrix’s UEM capability manages Windows User Profiles, which only allows IT to back up and 
restore a user profile from one system to another. VMware UEM allows IT to support more use 
cases including delivering consistent user experience across multiple platforms, during OS 
migration, between on-premises and cloud-based environments, and providing user 
environment settings using dynamic, contextual policy such as location.

VMware monitoring and automation capabilities provide end-to-end visibility from the data 
center to the end user. This surpasses competitive products such as Citrix’s Director/Edgesight. 
Citrix’s monitoring capabilities are limited to Citrix components and cannot provide the 
context of the greater system in the way VMware vRealize™ Operations for Horizon can 
provide. VMware vRealize provides visibility end to end from the data center to the end user.

VMware Horizon is the most complete solution for delivering, managing, and protecting 
Windows desktops, applications, and online services across devices, locations, media, and 
connections. The all-in-one packaging also makes it an excellent choice for the value-
conscious buyer.

      Additional Advantages
Beyond these reasons to choose Horizon over Citrix XenDesktop, consider these additional 
advantages. 

•	Superior Network Integration – VMware and F5 have developed a joint solution and 
partnership to provide best-of-breed VDI and network integration. F5 is the leader in 
the Application Delivery Controller market—far ahead of Citrix’s NetScaler—and the 
integration of Horizon and F5’s BIG-IP Access Policy Manager (APM) brings a new level 
of security capabilities to a virtual desktop deployment. 

•	VMware Mobile Device Management Leadership – AirWatch® by VMware provides the 

market-leading Mobile Device Management (MDM) solution. AirWatch MDM has the 
largest installed base, highest product quality, most scalable architecture, immediate 
support of new device OSs, and a fully integrated, unified single-pane-of-glass 
management system. Citrix’s MDM is a complex deployment with loose integration and 
confusing licensing. 

•	Highest Customer Satisfaction and Best Value – Customers as well as independent 

surveys and third-party reports consistently rate VMware as the best value for 
virtualization, with the highest level of customer satisfaction. In a report published by 
the Temkin Group on Net Promoter Scores (NPS), VMware placed first out of 54 vendors. 
The report considers the NPS an indicator of both customer loyalty and overall customer 
satisfaction. By contrast, Citrix scored in the lower half of the group, indicating that Citrix 
customers are less likely to recommend Citrix products and services to others.

      Horizon Is the Best Choice 
Millions of users can’t be wrong. Set your company apart from the competition by 
choosing VMware Horizon and receive the most value for your end-user computing dollar.

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.comCopyright © 2015 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed athttp://www.vmware.com/go/patents. VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. Item No: VWM-CDS-HORIZVSCITRIX-USLET-20150223-WEBVMware Horizon Advantages over Citrix 