Information Brief 

 

De-Risking Oracle Migrations with VirtualWisdom®  
Executive Summary 
Whether migrating to a new data center, upgrading a SAN or deploying new storage arrays, an 
Oracle migration project is never trivial. Oracle OLTP systems typically support business-critical 
processes, while Oracle warehouses handle large data volumes and essential analysis.  Downtime 
can be extremely costly, sometimes reaching hundreds of thousands of dollars an hour. 

Virtual Instruments reduces the risks of storage migration, helping organizations find and correct 
potential problems before the migration and trouble-shooting problems quickly to keep migrations on 
schedule. Using the VirtualWisdom™ platform, teams can benchmark performance before and after 
the migration and promptly fix any problems that might derail the project.  This document describes 
how VirtualWisdom reduces the risks of Oracle infrastructure changes and describes best practices 
for using VirtualWisdom as part of a migration project 

Assessing the Risks of Oracle Migration 
For a Fortune 500 company, the investment in an Oracle environment can exceed $100 million, 
including software, hardware and consulting.  Making changes, even for necessary upgrades and 
technology refreshes, is inherently risky. The risk is higher for applications supporting business-
critical processes. 

The Oracle DBA can protect the integrity of the data during migration using adequate care.  More 
often, the problems encountered during major Oracle transitions have to do with unexpected 
performance issues that are difficult to identify and correct.  These problems can have serious 
implications: 

  Degraded performance of critical applications.  Even subtle changes can introduce 

unexpected performance problems. When performance problems affect time-critical ERP or 
CRM applications using Oracle, the costs can be quite high.   

  Project delays.  For significant performance issues, you may have no choice but to delay the 

migration or roll back to older equipment. Project delays can extend for months while you 
search for the root cause, incurring costs for extending support on old systems, licensing, 
extensive consulting time, and lost opportunities. 

Summary:  

VirtualWisdom provides 
unprecedented visibility into 
performance across the 
entire Oracle infrastructure, 
from the application to the 
storage. 

Use VirtualWisdom to 
baseline and track 
application performance 
before, during and after a 
major Oracle migration. 

Rapid root cause analysis 
reduces the risk of project 
delays and rollbacks. 

VirtualWisdom enables pre-
migration storage analysis 
that can uncover 
infrastructure problems 
otherwise difficult to detect.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

VirtualInstruments.com 

 

  Over provisioning in the wrong places.  To fix or prevent performance issues, companies 

often over-provision the storage environment. This might mean putting every Oracle 
application on the most expensive, high-performance storage, or over-provisioning front end 
ports on the SAN controller. 

 

 

 

Tracking Performance Across Oracle Applications and Infrastructure 
Oracle applications are highly dependent on storage performance – OLTP systems need low latency 
read/writes, while data warehouses need to read massive amounts of data quickly.  When it comes to 
performance problems, the storage environment is usually guilty until proven innocent.  The storage 
administrator is often left with the difficult task of either finding the problem (in the devices or the 
storage network) or proving that it lies elsewhere. 

The multiple layers of abstraction make it even more difficult to isolate problems. Once, databases 
were connected to direct-attached storage.  Today there's a layer of virtualization within the storage 
cloud, the SAN network, and often the server environment as well. 

What's missing is the ability to track system-level I/O performance from the application through the 
infrastructure.  Without this visibility, any storage migration will hold inherent risk that is difficult to 
quantify or mitigate. 

Virtual Instruments and Oracle Migration 
VirtualWisdom™ from Virtual Instruments brings visibility into the storage environment, with the ability 
to track and measure performance from the application through the entire physical and/or virtual 
infrastructure.  Using VirtualWisdom provides the necessary data to make intelligent decisions about 
capacity, utilization and performance and to accelerate and de-risk Oracle migration projects. 

The complete solution platform includes VirtualWisdom software and hardware and SANInsight 
physical layer access hardware products. Together, these products provide an unprecedented level 
of physical and virtual infrastructure visibility for Oracle installations running in complex, 
heterogeneous Fibre Channel Storage Area Networks.  

Using VirtualWisdom, you can track infrastructure and read/write response time throughout the 
Oracle environment.  This insight lets you benchmark existing performance before a migration and 
find any issues or problems with the new environment before committing production systems to it.  
You can also set application-specific SLAs and monitor and alert on those levels both during and 
after the migration. 

 

 

VirtualWisdom offers configurable dashboards to monitor read/write performance throughout the 
infrastructure for the entire Oracle environment, at any level of granularity.  For example, you can 
monitor response times across specific applications:  

Or you can drill down to the Initiator / Target / LUN exchange completion times for writes on a port-
by-port basis. 

 

 

By drilling down to specific components, you can determine the performance impact of infrastructure 
changes, including hardware upgrades, firmware revisions and SAN modifications.   

With this new visibility, teams can adopt several best practices to better manage and reduce the 
potential risk of Oracle migrations. 

Best Practice #1 – Benchmarking Existing Performance 
Before performing any migration, use VirtualWisdom to establish the baseline performance on the 
existing infrastructure.  

Use these baselines to measure the effect of the migration on performance for critical applications. 
One major retailer used VirtualWisdom to benchmark 600 applications both before and after a 
migration to prove to internal auditors that the change did not impair performance. 

Also, a careful baseline analysis can uncover problems that may become bigger post-migration. For 
example, e-commerce company using VirtualWisdom to benchmark the infrastructure before 
upgrading to an 8Gb SAN uncovered ports that were outside of specification at 8Gb and others that 
were borderline at 4Gb.  By addressing these issues pre-migration, the company headed off potential 
problems in production. 

Best Practice #2 – Performing Pre-migration Storage Analysis 
Use VirtualWisdom to do a pre-migration analysis of the infrastructure and its performance 
implications before flipping the switch.  Many infrastructure and configuration issues are particularly 

 

 

important to troubleshoot, such as zone configuration naming problems, multipathing configuration 
and queue depth configuration.  By testing and addressing these issues before the transition you 
reduce the risk of outages, slowdowns and project delays. 

Best Practice #3 – Comparing Post-migration Performance   
Once you have successfully made the migration, use VirtualWisdom to benchmark the performance 
of each application and compare it to the pre-migration performance. If there are problems, 
application-by-application benchmarking lets you prioritize remediation efforts.  

Some problems don't show up until you're actually running in production on the new infrastructure. 
Finding and fixing them quickly can be critical for the overall success of the migration project.  
VirtualWisdom can help you track down the root cause of problems rapidly. With real-time 
monitoring, you can find the intermittent problems that fall in the sampling gaps of traditional 
monitoring tools.  

Best Practice #4 – Establishing Application-Specific SLAs 
Using VirtualWisdom, you can establish separate SLAs for each application or component. For 
example, you could set separate performance level thresholds (such as 5 millisecond response times) 
for Oracle ERP and CRM applications, and create alerts for faults. For data warehouse applications, 
track throughput as the warehouse grows and use this information to plan capacity based on 
performance needs. 

Summary 
No matter how critical the application, the Oracle infrastructure is never truly static.  Over time you 
need to upgrade various components of the infrastructure. The risk of performance problems grows 
greater during times of change. Using VirtualWisdom gives you the ability to track and monitor 
performance from the application through the infrastructure, and to pinpoint and resolve problems 
before they become serious. This new visibility reduces the risk of infrastructure change and protects 
critical application performance and investments. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Corporate Headquarters 
25 Metro Drive Suite 400 
San Jose, CA 95110 
Phone:  408-579-4000 
Fax:  408-579-4001 

 

European Headquarters 
One Kingdom Street 
Paddington Central * London W2 6BD 
Phone:  44 (0) 203 402 3353 

Sales 
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Support 
support@virtualinstruments.com 
 

©2012 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are 
trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or 
servicemarks of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 7/12 
 

