Technical Brief

Optimizing your EMC VPLEX-enabled Fibre
Channel SAN with VirtualWisdom®

VirtualWisdom increases the value and validates the benefits of storage
virtualization

VPLEX Architecture

EMC VPLEX is a virtual storage solution introduced by EMC in
May of 2010.  VPLEX is deployed as a cluster consisting of one
or more engines.  It implements a distributed "virtualization"
layer within and across geographically disparate Fibre Channel
storage area networks and Data Centers. With VPLEX's unique
distributed federation, data can be accessed and shared among
locations over synchronous distances. The VPLEX architecture
combines scale-out clustering with distributed cache coherence
intelligence to enable data mobility between EMC and non-EMC
platforms within, across, and between data centers.

VPLEX uses an in-band architecture which means that data
flowing between a host and a storage controller flows through
one or more directors. On the front end, VPLEX presents an
interface to a host which looks like a storage controller (like a
target). On the VPLEX back end, it provides interface to a
storage controller that looks like a host (like an initiator).

VirtualWisdom’s Value Add

Virtual Instruments customers use VirtualWisdom with VPLEX Local or Metro, and by Tapping the
VPLEX SAN with optical splitters (TAPs), they get full visibility into their environment. VPLEX users
enjoy the full benefits of VirtualWisdom, which include:

 Operational (OpEx) savings through improved operations and faster troubleshooting;
measuring latency in real-time, sometimes by recommending corrective action before
issues arise

VirtualWisdom
Increases the Benefits
of Storage
Virtualization:

 Enable more

aggressive use of
tiered storage by
improved tiered
storage planning and
ability to prove
performance SLAs

 Operational (OpEx)

savings through
improved operations
and faster
troubleshooting

 Capital expenditure
(CapEx) savings by
eliminating switch
over-provisioning and
over-tiering

 Better adherence to,

and monitoring of
SLAs and external
regulations

 Higher revenues

through accelerated
application and SAN
deployments

 Reduction in

unplanned downtime

Better adherence to, and monitoring of SLAs and external regulations

 Capital expenditure (CapEx) savings by eliminating over-provisioning and over-tiering

 Higher revenues through accelerated application and SAN deployments





Stronger vendor management and improved vendor relationships
Increased use of server virtualization
Accelerated use of  storage tiering
Reduction in unplanned downtime

With VirtualWisdom, reports can be created to show exactly how much the VPLEX is improving the
overall performance in the environment, and pave the way for increased use of lower cost, tier 2
storage devices.

A thorough discussion of VirtualWisdom benefits that apply to all FC SAN and virtualized
environments can be found in this brochure.

Technical Brief

VirtualWisdom Interoperability and Support for the VPLEX

I/O requests from hosts are to their virtual

The VPLEX does not modify Fibre Channel headers.
target and all of the requests to the storage arrays come from its virtual hosts. VirtualWisdom can
report how quickly each LUN provides its information to the VPLEX to troubleshoot any backend
storage issue, and can assess how quickly each application is getting their data from the VPLEX.
In that way, the storage administrator can tell how the VPLEX is impacting performance in the
environment, in either a Local or a Metro VPLEX configuration.
the TAP is placed between the switch and the VPLEX, allowing the user experience of the VPLEX
LUN to be measured.

In the following simplified diagram,

SAN Topology with VPLEXand VirtualWisdom–VPLEX Tapped

In this next diagram, the TAP is placed between the switch and the storage, allowing the effect on
application latency at the array to be measured.

SAN Topology with VPLEXand VirtualWisdom–Arrays Tapped

Technical Brief

And finally, as depicted in the diagram below, tapping into the front end and the back end of the
VPLEX is optimal because it provides compete Initiator/Target/LUN mapping, including the effect of
VPLEX-induced latency.

SAN Topology with VPLEXand VirtualWisdom–Fully Tapped

Summary

VirtualWisdom actually increases the value of the VPLEX by validating adherence to performance
SLAs in a virtualized server and storage environment. Additionally, more aggressive use of lower
tier storage behind the VPLEX helps to directly lower storage costs.

Corporate Headquarters
25 Metro Drive
Suite 400
San Jose, CA 95110
Phone: 408-439-4000

European Headquarters
One Kingdom Street
Paddington Central * London W2
6BD
Phone:  44 (0) 203 402 3353

Customer Support
support@virtualinstruments.com
www.virtualinstruments.com

©2012 Virtual Instruments. All
rights reserved. Features and
specifications are subject to
change without notice.
VirtualWisdom®, Virtual
Instruments, SANInsight are
trademarks or registered
trademarks in the United States
and/or in other countries. All
other brands, products, or service
names are or may be trademarks
or servicemarks of, and are used
to identify, products or services
of their respective owners.
07/24/12

