PARTNER SALES GUIDE 

FOR EMC ENVIRONMENTS

Virtual Instruments Summary
VI is the leader in end-to-end Infrastructure Performance Management (IPM) for 
physical, virtual and cloud computing environments—helping IT organizations monitor, 
troubleshoot and optimize the performance of mission-critical applications. 

VirtualWisdom® is VI’s IPM platform that provides real-time visibility into the 
performance, health and utilization of heterogeneous open system 
environments—enabling IT organizations to guarantee availability and performance of 
mission critical applications, while lowering total cost of infrastructure ownership.

VI and EMC2 Select Strategic Infrastructure Partnership:
Together EMC and VI are transforming cloud infrastructures, making them simpler 
to manage and more efficient to operate. The combined solutions deliver a 
powerful, efficient, and reliable infrastructure, enabled with real-time monitoring to 
ensure critical workloads and SLA’s are aligned to the infrastructure. 

VirtualWisdom® Architecture

ProbeVM

ProbeSW

Servers & VMs

FC Switch Fabric

Not buying 
VirtualWisdom for 
your SAN is like 
hospitals not buying 
heart monitors.

Storage Arrays

Senior Storage Engineer,
Large US Based Manufacturer

Virtual Server Probe

SAN Performance Probe

SANInsight® TAP Patch Panel

•  VirtualWisdom Dashboard correlates data from all probes into a single view in real time
•  SAN Availability Probe monitors FC switches via SNMP for physical errors 
•  SAN Performance Probe & TAPs monitors FC links in real-time ensuring application performance
•  Virtual Server Probe monitors performance & utilization of virtual servers

Phase 3

Phase 4

Phase 2

Transforming IT with VirtualWisdom 
The journey of transforming IT begins with gaining insight and ends with strategic optimization. 
Virtualized environment complexity coupled with constantly changing infrastructure(s) has 
created "Fabric Blindness" which is an ongoing threat to information availability and IT agility.
Steps to Transforming IT with VI
Phase 1

Visibility: Data collected from all points correlated, analyzed and 
populated into VirtualWisdom
De-Risking: Flagged issues in infrastructure addressed, Application 
workloads analyzed and stabilized
Operational Excellence: Applications optimized, ongoing stability 
achieved, proactive alerting initiated
Strategic Optimization: Business SLAs aligned with architecture and 
resources, Infrastructure efficiency and cost under control
VirtualWisdom Benefits to EMC Customers
Guarantees application performance: Real-time end-to-end view of all transactions 
from the VM to all heterogeneous storage arrays, including EMC® VMAX®, EMC® 
VNX®, EMC® DataDomain®, EMC® VPLEX, and Vblock™  systems; ensures 
uninterrupted access and performance of mission-critical applications
Guarantees application availability: Real-time alerts enables proactive addressing 
of problems before they impact business operations
Reduces troubleshooting time: Real-time analysis dramatically expedites 
troubleshooting by proving conclusively whether the problem lies in the SAN or elsewhere; 
VirtualWisdom accelerates SAN troubleshooting by days, weeks or even months
Improves resource utilization: Reduce over-provisioning without risking or 
impacting performance; attain complete insight into cloud infrastructure
Lowers risk and cost: Avoid costly application outages and slowdowns, and extend 
budget by using resources more efficiently 
Build a better cloud infrastructure: Eliminate the risk of deploying mission-critical 
applications in a private cloud through dedicated, comprehensive monitoring, 
measurement and analysis to ensure SLA adherence

Resources
Contact EMC Select Team
Scott.Ammidown@emc.com
More information on VirtualWisdom
Look up Virtual Instruments on Powerlink
virtualinstruments.com/products/about-virtualwisdom
Partner Contacts
dl-partneropportunities@virtualinstruments.com

Ordering
VirtualWisdom is available via 
Direct Express and Channel 
Express via EMC Select

Adding Value
VirtualWisdom® gives EMC a significant advantage over competitors by cutting 
through virtualization layers and delivering real-time visibility. Customers benefit 
from real-time transparency, improved performance and availability, and lower total 
cost for supporting and optimizing infrastructure performance.
Who To Target
Customers with mission-critical applications; they require the most powerful, 
efficient, end-to-end, virtualized environment. They must be monitored in real-time 
to maintain mission critical application SLA’s. 

Existing EMC customers with critical or revenue generating applications
Performance and availability are crucial to business profitability
New EMC deployments 
Proactively protecting infrastructures guarantees application performance
Complex physical infrastructures
Lack visibility/transparency which impacts business operations
Rapidly growing virtual environments
Virtualization greatly limits visibility and capability to monitor the success of 
business-critical deployments
New cloud initiatives
Moving mission critical applications to the cloud is being stopped/postponed 
because of the inability to guarantee availability and performance

CUSTOMER 
CHALLENGES

EXPLORATORY 
QUESTIONS

Visibility

Availability

Performance

Utilization

“Can you tell me about your infrastructure and how it is changing?”
“What is the business impact if your mission critical applications are not 
performing?”

“Can you tell me about any SAN related slowdowns or outages you have 
had recently?”
“What’s the value to your organization if you could reduce the risk of 
virtualizing mission-critical applications?”

“How do you ensure that your critical applications are tuned for optimal 
performance?”
“How do you establish, monitor and maintain your performance SLAs?”

“Do you plan on any new storage or SAN switch purchases in the near future?”
“Do you have a clear understanding of how your resources are being 
utilized?”

What To Sell: Products and Services
VI READY - TAP the Physical Infrastructure
Tapping is the 1st step to accelerating problem resolution.  Installing TAPs when 
new SAN and storage infrastructure is deployed, ensures that your customer’s 
infrastructure is VI Ready
Deliver Services or Proof of Value
Deliver proactive health scan services, emergency troubleshooting services, or give 
visibility to the customer of VI’s technical and business value with a Proof of Value (POV)
Comprehensive Real-Time Infrastructure Monitoring (Hardware/Software)
Monitoring with TAPs, hardware and software probes - Continuous optimization of 
performance, utilization, and availability for mission critical applications and infrastructure

Sell TAPs f Engage Virtual Instruments Services f Sell Virtual Instruments Solutions

VI Ready
Sell TAP Patch Panels 
at time of storage or 
networking purchase

VI Services
Health Scan
SOS4SANS
Proof of Value

Implement Full Solution 
with HW & SW
VirtualWisdom
Virtual Server Probe
SAN Availability Probe
SAN Performance Probe

How to Overcome Objections
“I already have ProSphere and Watch-4-Net, Why do I need VirtualWisdom?”
Answer: These tools and are great for providing SAN management capabilities, 
VirtualWisdom complements them and add value by enabling real-time performance 
management of mission-critical applications. VirtualWisdom provides detailed performance 
metrics down to the second!
“TAPs can be very disruptive, I am not sure I want them in my environment!”
Answer: They are passive devices and add zero degradation to the infrastructure. TAPs 
are very easily installed during a maintenance window or as you deploy new storage 
infrastructure. 
“I do not have a budget right now, how can I justify this to my CFO?”
Answer: If the business impact of an outage can be quantified, then payback can 
be almost immediate, otherwise payback is typically within a year as problem 
resolution times and trouble tickets are dramatically reduced and SAN purchases 
are more strategically aligned to the needs of the business. 

