Technology Brief 
 

Instrumenting and Optimizing Fibre Channel over 
Ethernet (FCoE) with Virtual Instruments 

Fibre Channel over Ethernet (FCoE) is a protocol that enables the encapsulation of fibre channel 
frames over selected full duplex Ethernet (IEEE 802.3) networks. The goal is to provide I/O 
consolidation over Ethernet, reducing network complexity and cost in the datacenter.  To enable 
FCoE, a modified version of Ethernet most commonly known as Converged Enhanced Ethernet 
(CEE), which Cisco calls DCE, is being designed to provide lossless networking.  FCoE is being 
touted as a server-side edge network connection, where Converged Network Adapters (CNAs) 
would eventually replace traditional fiber channel host bus adapters (HBAs) and 10GigE network 
interface cards (NICs).  These would be connected to FCoE “top-of-rack” switches that would then 
be directly connected to a traditional fibre channel switch.  
 

 
To help our customers understand the impact of FCoE on their SAN and virtualized infrastructures, 
this paper briefly explains … 

 

1.  Where the industry is today  
2.  Benefits and risks of deploying FCoE 
3.  Where the industry is likely to go 
4. 
5.  How Virtual Instruments’ products can help 

Importance of instrumentation & monitoring when FCoE is implemented 

 

 

 

Summary:  

 

• 

• 

• 

FCoE Background 
FCoE standards have 
been ratified, and 
along with Converged 
Enhanced Ethernet 
(CEE), intent is to 
reduce networking 
complexity in the 
datacenter 
 
 

FCoE Availability 
Vendors such as 
Cisco, Intel, QLogic, 
Emulex and Brocade 
offer FCoE products 
today, in what is 
referred to as “top of 
rack” solutions 
 
 

FCoE Risk and 
Reality 
According to Gartner, 
the technologies 
needed to fulfill the 
promises of the 
economic benefits of 
FCoE are still at least 
3 years away 

As traffic shares 
ports, line cards and 
inter-switch links, 
avoiding congestion 
(hot spots) becomes 
extremely difficult 

Without proper 
network 
instrumentation, you 
have no visibility and 
no ability to manage 
the quality of service  

 

 

 

VirtualInstruments.com 

 

FCoE today and in the near term 

Vendors such as Cisco, Intel, QLogic, Emulex, Brocade and others are now releasing FCoE optical 
products (adapters and switches) today, in what are referred to as “top-of-rack” solutions.  With the 
immaturity of the protocol and these products, we believe that fibre channel will continue to be the 
interconnect of choice at the high end of the market.  Mission-critical servers will continue to use 
fibre channel HBAs for connectivity for at least the next 3 to 5 years. 

• 

FCoE benefits   

Cost savings from FCoE are expected to come from the reduction of cables, ports and rack-space 
consumption from having both fibre channel and Ethernet switches in a single rack.  With hundreds 
of servers in a rack supporting up to 1,000 virtual machines, the traditional way of connecting to 
these servers with individual FC cards and NICs is costly. Converged network adapters (CNAs) 
reduce the number of cables in the rack by about two-thirds. Two 20Gb cables from the CNAs 
connect each server to a top-of-rack switch. This switch then connects to the existing Ethernet and 
FC networks.  The benefits of this approach are touted to be lower cost blades and server racks 
that are easier to maintain, have lower heat, space, and power requirements, and will be more 
reliable. 

Since the protocol is still Fibre Channel underneath the traffic that runs on it can work with current 
fibre channel networks and management software packages, even though it’s on Ethernet cabling. 
This can potentially be a large benefit to the higher end of the enterprise market where customers 
have huge investments in Fibre Channel storage and have already invested in SAN monitoring, 
provisioning, performance analysis and data protection tools, as well as in the personnel needed to 
keep these networks running well. 

 

FCoE risks and reality 
In a Gartner report “Myth: Single FCoE Data Center Network = Fewer Ports, Less Complexity 
and Lower Costs” dated March 11, 20101
technologies needed to fulfill the economic promises aren’t there yet.  He states that when two 
networks are overlaid on a single infrastructure, complexity increases significantly.  As traffic shares 
ports, line cards and inter-switch links, avoiding congestion (hot spots) becomes extremely difficult.  
Over time, emerging standards, such as Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links (TRILL) may 
make it easier to avoid these hot spots, but mature standards-compliant implementations are at 
least three years away. 

, Research Vice President Joe Skorupa states the 

Today, CNAs continue to more expensive than HBAs and customers still need to buy and maintain 
fibre channel switches/directors, so there’s no financial benefit to FCoE.  Migrating to FCoE sounds 
good on paper, but a key concern for network administrators is how to protect existing network 
performance when FCoE moves in.  In the past, network planners brought in Fibre Channel 
equipment because of the guarantees it provided through its dedicated link architecture: 
guaranteed performance, guaranteed latency, and guaranteed robustness.  Ethernet is well-known 
for not providing these guarantees.  The biggest issue in the convergence of fiber channel and 
Ethernet is that Ethernet was designed to be a 'best effort' network.  Ethernet allows for occasional 
packet drops when networking gear is flooded with traffic. This is fine, given that the TCP/IP 
networking protocol has checks built in, allowing clients to re-request packets that may have gone 
missing during transmission.  Fibre Channel is essentially an encapsulation of SCSI commands and 
runs with the expectation that data sent to and from storage gear and servers will get to its final 
destination in a timely fashion, with no possibility of packet loss.  

To resolve these differences, Converged Enhanced Ethernet (CEE ) is being developed.  Cisco calls 
this Data Center Ethernet (DCE).   Under CEE, the IEEE committee and vendors are working on 
standards to deal with Priority Flow Control (PFC), which allows multiple network protocols to share 
an Ethernet link without interfering with each other.  A developing bandwidth management 

 
 
 
VI Aids the 
Transition to FCoE 
Today, Virtual 
Instruments offers 
FCoE support from 
the host to the LUN 
with our 
VirtualWisdom 
software,  and our 
hardware TAPs, 
probes,  and protocol 
analyzers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

“The barriers to a single 
network range from a 

dearth of available 

products and the price 
premium charged for 
those products to the 
requirement to 'forklift 
upgrade' your entire 

network, to long-

standing organizational 

conflicts." 

Joe Skorupa 
Research Vice President 
Gartner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                            
1 Full report is available to Gartner clients 

 

 

standard, known as Enhanced Transmission Selection, provides the consistent scheduling required 
for converged networking, allowing bursty workloads to use unused Ethernet bandwidth that may 
have been allocated to other traffic types.  Additionally, another standard provides congestion 
management capabilities, allowing CEE switches to notify endpoints of congestion issues and 
request them to throttle back traffic.  

In order for network administrators to feel confident enough to migrate to FCoE, they will need to be 
able to test and verify real-world performance against the marketing claims of FCoE equipment 
manufacturers.  While the standard drafts are as good as they sound, developers and 
administrators still need a way to verify that a particular implementation has been successful in 
meeting latency requirements.   Administrators will need to be able to verify end-to-end 
performance.  An FCoE link is comprised of an Ethernet link accessing Fibre Channel storage.  
Measuring performance up to the transition point fails to take into account all of the unexpected 
problems when crossing protocol domains.    

And finally, there is a challenge in bringing two organizations together, the networking team and the 
storage team.  On top of that, FCoE will require coordination among many storage, network, 
adapter, switch vendors, and others.  The need for a referee will be greater than ever.  These IT 
groups and vendors use very different management tools, reflecting the different views of the 
network.  At the end of the day they all have to work together to ensure zero data loss and 
adequate application response time. 

And while there are still challenges around FCoE implementation and deployments, it’s not the 
purpose of this paper to outline them all.  Our focus here is purely on the challenges of maintaining 
performance and availability in today’s infrastructure for your business-critical applications.  

In FCoE environments, it’s more important than in a traditional fibre channel-only environment to 
instrument the network.  Without proper instrumentation, because of the converged network, there 
is no visibility or ability to manage the quality of service all the way to the host.   If there are 
problems with the fibre channel infrastructure it may not be possible to tell which portion of that 
10G path is FC traffic vs all the other Ethernet-based traffic.  With instrumentation the integrity of 
the Initiator-Target-LUN relationship is maintained and can measure the I/O associated with FC 
communications.  And with instrumentation all of the players - IT staff and vendors – are provided 
with a common, vendor-independent set of metrics to make intelligent decisions. 
Virtual Instruments and FCoE 
Today, Virtual Instruments’ products monitor fibre channel traffic from the Initiator (host) to the 
Target (LUN).  The Converged Network Adapter is operating as both a NIC and as a virtual HBA, 
with an HBA driver stack, a WWN and fibre channel ID.  So today, VirtualWisdom can be used to 
instrument, monitor, measure, and optimize a mixed FC and FCoE storage network.  So, if you see 
the benefits of building an FCoE infrastructure from the edge to the host, you should be cautious 
and ensure that you don’t lose visibility into the data path.  Virtual Instruments can be used to: 
Instrument  

Having all of the relevant information to optimize performance and solve virtual 
infrastructure and SAN-related problems requires capturing both directions of every SCSI 
I/O transaction from start to finish, for every server/volume combination 
(initiator/target/LUN). Only with this complete information can an IT organization go about 
resolving performance or availability problems.  As a key part of the Virtual Instruments 
solution, the Traffic Access Point (TAP) is the device that enables full instrumentation of the 
Fibre Channel network. It “taps” the network, generally between the FC switch and the 
storage system. With TAPs installed on all key links within the data center, users can deploy 
a number of devices that monitor and diagnose link performance without any further 
latency, interruption or downtime.   
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
“The promise that a 
single converged data 
center network would 
require fewer switches 
and ports doesn’t stand 
up to scrutiny.  This is 
because as networks grow 
beyond the capacity of a 
single switch, ports must 
be dedicated to 
interconnecting switches.  
In large mesh networks, 
entire switches do nothing 
but connect switches to 
one another.  As a result, a 
single converged network 
actually uses more ports 
than a separate local area 
network (LAN) and storage 
area network (SAN).  
Additionally, since more 
equipment is required, 
maintenance and support 
costs are unlikely to be 
reduced.”   
Joe Skorupa, 
Research Vice President 
Gartner 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Monitor, Measure, and Optimize for Performance and Availability 

Virtual Instruments SAN Performance Probe monitors and measures I/O performance from 
the server to the LUN, and utilizes the SAN Availability Probe monitoring software to 
correlate metrics from the fibre channel switch.  VirtualWisdom provides intelligent reports, 
real-time alerts, and diagnosis tools to add SAN I/O intelligence to physical and virtualized 
environments, enabling administrators to quickly troubleshoot application performance 
problems and better balance the deployment of virtual machines based on real-time 
measurements of I/O performance. 

The future 

Over the next few years, FCoE is expected to emerge as a SAN connectivity option for target 
storage devices.  We agree with Gartner, and expect it to take a few years for these storage devices 
to be production ready for mission-critical workloads.   When FCoE is ready to host the crown 
jewels of corporate data, Virtual Instruments will be ready with a native FCoE Probe to ensure the 
performance and availability of the end to end FCoE SAN.   
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Corporate Headquarters 
25 Metro Drive Suite 400 
San Jose, CA 95110 
Phone:  408-579-4000 
Fax:  408-579-4001 

 

Sales 
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Phone:  408-579-4081 

Support 
support@virtualinstruments.com 
 

©2011 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are 
trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or servicemarks 
of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 09/11 

 

