Tech Brief 

 

 

 

 

Gartner SAN Monitoring and VI  

 

August 2011 

 

 

VirtualInstruments.com 

 

 

 

 

Recommendations For SAN Fabric Dashboards   
In June 2011, leading analyst firm Gartner published a paper entitled “Recommendations for SAN Fabric 
Dashboards”.  In it, Gartner describes the primary or high-level indicators that would be used in the central 
operational control center to provide a status display of the SAN fabric environment.  Additionally, Gartner 
listed the secondary indicators that need to be monitored and available for operators to determine the severity 
of any event or exception, first-level problem determination and short-term forecasting.  Gartner notes that the 
recommendations in the report can be used as a starting point for organizations that do not monitor their SAN 
fabrics. These recommendations can be used to check and compare with those used by SAN fabric 
dashboards, monitoring or reporting processes. 

Following is the list of Gartner’s primary and secondary indicators, followed by a brief description of Virtual 
Instruments’ adherence. 

 
SAN Dashboard 
Indicator - primary 
Failed or unreliable 
port or link  

Top user of 
network bandwidth 
and resources  
Response or delay 
thresholds 
exceeded  

Multipath or dual 
SAN failure  

Explanation 
A network connection from a server, network 
device or storage array has failed. This 
includes cyclical redundancy check errors, 
code violations, loss of sync and loss of signal 
errors.  
Indicator of the server and application that is 
consuming the most storage bandwidth in the 
storage fabric.  
Input/output (I/O) response delays or 
excessive queuing. I/O performance has 
exceeded a threshold — an "acceptable 
value" or specific limits for servers and 
performance critical applications.  
A failure has occurred that has caused a SAN 
network, HBA, interswitch link (ISL) or storage 
array single point of failure (SPOF).  

SAN switch health   A SAN fabric network switch has reached its 

high CPU or memory threshold, is suffering 
from some form of contention, or a component 
(such as a fan, an optical connection or a 
power supply unit) has failed and requires 
replacement.  

VI Adherence 
Available.  Also provides leading 
indicators to help predict 
problems. 

Available for physical or virtual 
servers via “top talker” widgets.  
Application is inferred. 
Available through several 
widgets, including unique HBA 
queue depth reports. 

Available, plus unique reporting 
that alerts to potential outages 
or unbalanced links. 
Partially available - externally 
viewable metrics indicate 
internal problems.  Recommend 
switch vendor dashboard for 
internal switch components. 

 

 

 

 

2                                                    VIRTUAL INSTRUMENTS TECH BRIEF 
 

 

SAN Dashboard 
Indicator - secondary 
Excessive connection 
or link failures 

Queue depth issues 

Explanation 
Monitoring and alerting of all the 
connections and links in the SAN fabric 
that have failed. 
Monitoring and alerting of any 
connections within the SAN fabric that 
have high queue lengths or have 
exceeded the defined or default 
thresholds 

Alternative path failure   Alternative path or link failure between 

a server and storage device 

ISL excessive high 
utilization or failure 
Fan in/out ratios 
exceeded  

SAN switch 
component problem 

Protocol errors and 
dropped frames 

Optical failures  

Bandwidth utilization 
to frame rate 

Orphaned zones 

ISL oversubscription or failure among 
SAN switches 
Switch, ISL or HBA ports that have 
exceeded the number of fan-out 
connections 
Internal SAN switch resources, such as 
CPU, RAM utilization, or a high 
threshold 
 
Component or links that are exceeding 
the set limit or threshold of protocol 
errors, including Small Computer 
System Interface (SCSI) reservation 
problems, or are losing or dropping an 
excessive number of FC frames 
Small-form-factor pluggable converters 
or GBICs that have optical failures 
exceeding accepted thresholds. 
Has the ratio of management frames 
versus data frames exceeded a 
threshold? 
FC zones that exist, but are inactive, 
and are not used within the SAN fabric. 

VI Adherence 
Available.  Also provides leading 
indicators to help predict problems. 

Available, including unique HBA 
queue depth reports. 

Available, plus unique reporting that 
alerts to potential outages or 
unbalanced links which could lead to 
performance problems. 
Available; and predictive analysis 
available with “what if” simulations. 
Available through VirtualWisdom 
User Defined Context feature. 

Not available from VirtualWisdom, 
but is available from switch vendor 
dashboards. 

Available, including CRCs, link 
resets, loss of sync, loss of signal, 
class 3 discards, and others. 

Available through ‘loss of signal’ and 
other leading indicators. 

Available through User Defined 
Context report widgets. 

Partially available through inference.  
VirtualWisdom can notify when a 
zone has changed state by tracking 
the number of RSCN frames. 

 
Conclusion  
When monitoring large Fibre Channel SAN installations, it’s easy to become overwhelmed by the complexity and 
the scale of components that need to be monitored. Therefore, it is important to be able to consolidate the 
reporting data into a high-level, simple-to-understand dashboard. With VirtualWisdom, IT operations staff has the 
ability to drill down to the root cause of any problem; and more importantly, to see leading indicators that serve as 
predictors of SAN-induced slowdowns or availability problems.  When combined with the native FC switch 
management dashboard, VirtualWisdom provides a complete host to storage monitoring solution

 

Corporate Headquarters 
25 Metro Drive Suite 400 
San Jose, CA 95110 
Phone:  408-579-4000 
Fax:  408-579-4001 

 

Sales 
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Phone:  408-579-4081 

Support 
support@virtualinstruments.com 
 

©2011 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are 
trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or servicemarks 
of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 08/11 
 

 

 

