fpo image

ALwAySON	POINT	OF	CARE

Constant	Availability	to	Patient	Care	Applications

Continuous Access to EMR is Critical for Patient Safety 
Digitized medical records can reduce medical errors, improve patient safety and 
produce better clinical outcomes—but if the caregiver cannot access the Electronic 
Medical Record (EMR) system because their datacenter is down, the consequences can 
be serious. When electronic devices replace paper charts and physician prescription 
pads, the reliability, availability and security of the underlying system delivering clinical 
workspaces becomes critical.

That is why modernization of the point-of-care desktop has become an urgent priority 
for hospital IT professionals as well as hospital caregivers. Desktops and patient care 
applications must be immediately accessible and available to caregivers even in the 
event of site failures and outages.

VMware and VCE have a solution. By virtualizing desktops and hosting them on VMware 
vSphere™, a key component of VMware View, and using this tested architectural design, 
healthcare organizations can now have unparalleled desktop and application reliability 
and availability. If an outage should occur, the caregiver simply logs back into their 
desktop by either tapping a proximity card, swiping their finger on a biometric device 
or entering their username and password, and they will be immediately presented with 
their clinical desktop so they can resume caring for patients.

•	VALIdATEd	solution	

architecture	that	provides	non-
stop	access	to	clinical	desktops	
and	Electronic	Medical	Record	
applications	for	healthcare	
providers

•	INTEgRATEd	and	tested	
VMware	and	Technology	
Alliance	Partner	solution	based	
on	mobile,	wireless,	and	wired	
networks

•	PROVIdES	constant	

monitoring,	load	balancing		
and	data	replication	features	
for	optimizing	performance	
and	uptime

www.vce.com

www.vce.com

THE WORLD’S MOST ADVANCED CONVERGED INFRASTRUCTURE

AlwaysOn Point of Care  
Improves Patient Care
The VMware AlwaysOn Point of Care 
solution architecture allows clinicians 
and staff to achieve the continuous 
level of availability they demand. In 
a typical IT environment, only the 
production environment is backed up. 
But by having an Active-Active desktop 
environment running identical desktop 
images, even if there is a failure at the 
primary site, end users can promptly 
access their desktops and applications. 
If a healthcare provider’s infrastructure 
is compromised through a natural 
disaster or other outage, caregivers—
who are many times among the first 
responders—can be assured they 
can reach their clinical desktops and 
applications where and when they are 
needed the most. 

This new architectural design features 
continuous monitoring capabilities, as 
well as load balancing with constant 
data replication across sites to ensure 
that if the primary site is down 
VMware View will seamlessly failover 
to the secondary site so the caregiver 
experiences minimal disruption. As a 
result, IT can now deliver non-stop point 
of care desktops with all applications 
and data readily available where and 
when they are needed most.

Solution Elements
AlwaysOn Point of Care is a validated 
solution architecture offered by VMware 
and VCE. It is specifically built to meet 
the needs of healthcare organizations. It 
combines VMware, VCE and ecosystem 
products and services to meet stringent 
requirements for availability, security, 
elastic scaling, rapid and automated 
provisioning, high capacity, and low 
latency with no single point of failure. 
Key solution elements include:

VMware View

The cornerstone of the AlwaysOn 
Point of Care solution, VMware View 
modernizes desktops and applications 
by moving them into the cloud and 
delivering them as a highly available 
managed service. From the end user’s 
perspective, View makes it possible to 
work from virtually any location using 
any qualified device to access clinical 
desktops—PCs, thin clients, zero clients, 
iPads, and other tablets. The user’s 
familiar desktop appears on each device 
with everything in the right place, with 
all authorized applications, files, and 
data available, and with everything 
functioning as expected.

In the event of a site disruption, users 
can connect back to the same desktop 
running the identical master image 
within seconds.

VCE Vblock Systems

AlwaysOn Point of Care desktops are 
ideally hosted on Vblock Systems, which 
seamlessly integrate leading compute, 
network, and storage technologies. 
Through intelligent discovery, awareness, 
and automation, Vblock Systems provide 
at-scale virtualization and application 
performance. Vblock Systems are 
designed with security in mind, drawing 
upon the resources of RSA, EMC, 
Cisco, and VMware. Security is tested 
and proven not only within VCE R&D, 
but also at many of the world’s most 
demanding government and enterprise 
data centers.  By taking a system-level 
viewpoint of converged infrastructure 
and driving standardization of best-of-
breed technologies, Vblock Systems 
can uniquely optimize a virtual desktop 
project so that it can flexibly meet any 
processing, bandwidth, transactional, 
or capacity requirements, enabling high 
concurrency rates typical of a virtual 
desktop workload.

www.vce.com

Imprivata OneSign 

Cloud-based records management 

Imprivata OneSign® provides SSO 
and strong authentication, permitting 
users to access all workstations and 
applications they are authorized to use. 
By configuring and linking multiple 
instances of virtual appliances at 
both sites with fault tolerance, during 
the site failover, desktop agents 
can continuously look up the next 
working instance without disrupting 
the workflow. Users easily connect to 
virtual desktops and applications via 
Imprivata OneSign single signon from 
the access point all the way through to 
the EMR application. 

The AlwaysOn Point of Care solution 
incorporates services such as Health 
Info Exchanges (HIEs), which transition 
previously siloed medical information to 
a mesh environment and make it readily 
accessible using high-capacity mobile, 
wireless and wireline services. The 
solution design simulates the application 
configuration (i.e. VitalImages Vitrea, 
Microsoft Exchange, VMware View 
and Imprivata OneSign) workload 
analysis and reporting in the third-party 
application hosting and cloud sites. 

The Vblock System uses EMC storage 
for reliable high performance. Site-to-
site replication of the Master Images is 
performed with EMC VNX Replicator 
storage technology to provide data 
redundancy and reduced recovery 
times. Asynchronous replication is used 
with NFS datastores. EMC storage 
platforms have the flexibility to support 
a variety of replication models, including 
synchronous or asynchronous block-
based replication as well with EMC 
Recoverpoint.

Figure 1: The AlwaysOn Point of Care solution integrates mobile, 
wireless and wired networks via VMware and partner products to 
deliver continuous desktop uptime.

	 VMware	services	and	

partnerships	make	it	easy	
to	implement	the	solution	
without	specialized		
in-house	expertise

The chart below summarizes the key VMware, VCE and partner  
products that comprise the AlwaysOn Point of Care solution.

PARTNER 
PRODUCTS

USE CASE — HIGH 
AVAILABILITY AND 
CAPACITY EXTENSIBILITY

USE CASE — DISASTER 
RECOVERY AND DESKTOP 
PORTABILITY

•  Compose and recompose 

•  Access from mobile or 

desktop images

stationary devices

VMware View

•  Profile redirection to keep 

•  Desktop follows clinician 

user data persistent

from device to device

•  High-performance desktop 

•  Instant desktop provisioning 

experience with PCoIP

and user entitlement 

VCE Vblock

Imprivata 
OneSign

•  Well defined scalability

•  Simplified provisioning

•  Repeatable, modular 

architecture

•  High availability design

•  Redundant components and 

data paths

•  Multiple replication, archive, 

and backup solutions

•  Application and session 

roaming

•  Multiple appliance 

configuration for HA

•  Single signon to 

applications

•  Fault tolerance

•  Use access policy for virtual 

desktop and endpoint

•  Kiosk Mode Application SSO

AlwaysOn Learn More 
For additional information about 
how the AlwaysOn Point of Care 
solution is built and validated, read 
the AlwaysOn Point of Care Reference 
Validation document at: www.vce.
com/solution/applications/end-user/
AlwaysOnSolutionArchitecture.pdf

Or call VCE for an assessment today. 
Our experts will help you determine the 
opportunity for your organization—and 
chart your course to continuous desktop 
access. For more information or to 
purchase VCE products, visit vce.com

Summary 
AlwaysOn Point of Care from VMware 
and VCE is a managed network/
connectivity solution optimized for 
the specific, stringent requirements 
of medical organizations. It integrates 
technology and solutions from VMware, 
VCE and our thriving ecosystem of 
partners. The solution leverages mobile, 
wireless and wired networks that are 
customized to health care industry 
requirements. 

Together, VMware, VCE and our partners 
can deliver continuous desktop uptime 
to enable access to critical medical 
applications and records. More than 
that, we deliver true peace of mind for 
medical professionals—and the highest 
levels of patient care. 

	
Copyright	©2013	VCE	Company,	LLC.	All	rights	reserved.	VCE,	VCE	Vision,	Vblock,	and	the	VCE	logo	are	registered	trademarks	or	trademarks	of	VCE	Company	LLC	or	its	
affiliates	in	the	United	States	and/or	other	countries.	All	other	trademarks	used	herein	are	the	property	of	their	respective	owners.

FOR	MORE	INFORMATION,	VISIT	US	AT  www.vce.com

