 

Intel® Data Plane Development Kit 

(Intel® DPDK) with VMware vSphere® 

 

  

 

 

August 2014 

S O L UT I O N  O V E RV I E W   

 

Rec overy Manager 
Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) with VMware vSphere ®  
 

 

Table of Contents 

Introduction ................................................................................................................3 

VMware and Intel Partnership ....................................................................................3 

Intel Data Plane Development Kit ..............................................................................4 

VMware vSphere ......................................................................................................5 

Solution Architecture..................................................................................................8 

Intel DPDK Para-virtual Device Connectivity ..............................................................9 

Direct Assignment Connectivity ............................................................................... 10 

Intel DPDK in the Cloud ............................................................................................ 11 

Conclusion................................................................................................................ 13 

Resources ................................................................................................................. 14 

Acknowledgements .................................................................................................. 16 

 
 

.  

 

 

S O L I T I O N   O VER VEW   / I I    

 

Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) with VMware vSphere ®   

Introduction 
Businesses are moving away from their dependence on an ever-increasing variety of non-
virtualized, dedicated, proprietary physical solutions. Instead, they are moving to agile, high 
performance, high throughput, and highly efficient virtualization solutions that are cloud ready. 

In order to be cloud ready, virtualization solutions need to span across server, storage, and 
networking. For compute and I/O intensive applications and architectures that require high 
bandwidth and predictable latency, businesses typically discover that it is not enough to just 
deploy flexible, virtual server applications – the underlying I/O must also be flexible, virtual, and 
easy to configure and deploy. 

Historically, traditional core networks used custom hardware based on the need for performance 
and capabilities that standard off-the-shelf hardware could not provide. This left the intelligence 
of the network embedded in custom hardware and chipsets that were expensive to buy, difficult 
to manage, and slow to change. These non-virtualized, legacy solutions also kept businesses 
locked into dedicated, proprietary hardware, and inflexible legacy applications and architectures. 

Today, many Telecom service providers are using “Network Functions Virtualization” (NFV) to 
transform the economics of traditional proprietary hardware architectures around the core 
network. Instead of non-virtualized, proprietary hardware, service providers can now use 
standard Intel® architecture-based servers to execute most mission critical workloads. Moving 
beyond Software-Defined Data Center (SDDC) concepts, service providers are embracing NFV as 
the logical next step in the on-going effort to abstract hardware resources across all types of 
data center infrastructure. 

This paper describes the Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) 1.6 with VMware 
vSphere® (VMware® ESXi™) 5.5 solution. Intel DPDK packet processing software running on 
standard Intel® architecture-based servers can now perform tasks that were traditionally 
assigned to hardware, such as application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) and field 
programmable gate arrays (FPGAs). The Intel DPDK with VMware vSphere solution can be used 
to rapidly migrate legacy applications from non-virtualized, dedicated proprietary hardware to 
high performance, high throughput, and highly efficient cloud-ready environments. 

VMware and Intel Partnership 
Intel® and VMware® are working together through collaboration and joint innovation with 
virtualized data centers to migrate legacy solutions, and then to “future proof” applications with 
next-generation capabilities. This proven partnership has resulted in a differentiated Intel DPDK 
solution that delivers agile and scalable virtual and physical architectures that can provide for 
high throughput and predictable latency.  

Each of the enabling technologies of the Intel DPDK with VMware vSphere solution is described 
in the sections below.  

 

S O L U T I O N   O V ER V I EW   / 3   

 

Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) with VMware vSphere ®   

Intel Data Plane Development Kit   

The Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) is an open source, BSD-licensed optimized 
software library for Linux User Space applications. Intel DPDK enables higher levels of packet 
processing throughput than what is achievable using the standard Linux kernel network stack. 
This optimized library gives application developers the ability to address challenging data plane 
processing needs, typically found in Telecom and networking workloads, all in software and on 
general purpose, Intel architecture-based processors. 

Figure 1. Intel DPDK high level architecture 

 
The key software components for Intel DPDK include the Environment Abstraction Layer (EAL), 
Memory Pool Manager, Buffer Manager, Queue Manager, Ring Manager, Flow Classification, and 
Poll Mode Drivers for 1 Gigabit Ethernet (GbE) and 10 GbE controllers. 

 

The Intel DPDK fundamentals include: 

 

Implements a “run-to-completion” model. 

  Accesses all devices by polling without a scheduler. 

  Accesses all devices directly from Linux User Space. 

 

S O L U T I O N   O V ER V I EW   / 4   

 

Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) with VMware vSphere ®   

  Runs in 32-bit and 64-bit mode, with or without non-uniform memory access (NUMA). 

 

 

Scales from Intel® Atom™ processors to Intel® Xeon® processors. 

Supports an unlimited number of processors and processor cores. 

  Optimizes packet allocation across dynamic random access memory (DRAM) channels. 

  Allocates memory from the local node when possible.  

  Ensures that all data structures and objects are cache-aligned for superior performance. 

Designed to accelerate packet processing performance, Intel DPDK provides Intel architecture-
optimized libraries that allow developers to focus on their applications. Intel DPDK provides non-
GPL source code libraries that can enable exceptional data plane performance, ease software 
development, and minimize development time. Developers can make additions and 
modifications to the Intel DPDK source code in a production network element to meet 
individualized system needs.  

Intel DPDK provides software pre-fetching, which increases performance by bringing data from 
memory into cache before it is needed, thereby significantly reducing memory latency. 
Developers can build applications with the libraries using “run-to-completion” and/or “pipeline” 
models that enable the equipment manufacturer’s application to maintain complete control. 

VMware vSphere 

VMware vSphere® is an optimal, industry leading virtualization platform that can be used as an 
enabling technology for building cloud computing architectures. vSphere delivers control over IT 
resources with the highest efficiency and choice in the industry, and it permits IT to meet service 
level agreements (SLAs) for the most demanding business-critical applications. This helps to 
lower the total cost of ownership (TCO). 

vSphere virtualization creates a layer of abstraction between the resources that are required by 
an application and operating system, and the underlying hardware that provides those 
resources. It enables multiple, isolated execution environments to share a single hardware 
platform. 

vSphere accelerates the shift to cloud computing for existing data centers. It also supports 
compatible public cloud offerings, forming the foundation for the industry’s only hybrid cloud 
model. This makes VMware vSphere a trusted platform for any application. 

 

S O L U T I O N   O V ER V I EW   / 5   

 

Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) with VMware vSphere ®   

Figure 2. VMw are vSphere virtual infrastructure 

 
VMware vSphere virtualization provides for: 

 

  Consolidation. VMware virtualization allows multiple application servers to be consolidated 

to one physical server, with little or no decrease in overall performance. This helps to 
minimize or eliminate underutilized server hardware, software, and infrastructure.  

  Manageability. The live migration of virtual machines from server to server, and the 
migration of the associated storage, is performed with no downtime using VMware 
vSphere® vMotion® and VMware vSphere® Storage vMotion®.  

  Availability. High availability can be enabled to reduce unplanned downtime and enable 

higher service levels for applications. VMware vSphere® High Availability (HA) ensures that, 
in the event of an unplanned hardware failure, the affected virtual machines are 
automatically restarted on another host in the vSphere cluster.  

  Automation. VMware’s automated load balancing takes advantage of vMotion and Storage 

vMotion to migrate virtual machines among a set of VMware® ESXi™ hosts. VMware 
vSphere® Distributed Resource Scheduler™ (DRS) and VMware vSphere® Storage DRS™ 
enable automatic resource relocation and optimization for virtual machines and storage.  

 

S O L U T I O N   O V ER V I EW   / 6   

 

Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) with VMware vSphere ®   

  Provisioning. VMware virtualization encapsulates an application into an image that can be 
duplicated or moved, greatly reducing the cost of application provisioning and deployment.  

In addition, VMware vSphere® 5.5 extends the core capabilities of the vSphere platform with the 
introduction of new networking features and enhancements. These include Lightweight Access 
Control Protocol (LACP) enhancements, traffic filtering, quality-of-service (QoS) tagging, single 
root I/O virtualization (SR-IOV) enhancements, enhanced host-level packet capture, and 40 GbE 
network interface card (NIC) support. 

VMware Infrastructure Components 

The Intel DPDK virtualization solution employs VMware vSphere virtual networking elements 
that are similar to those used in the physical environment, but with some advanced capabilities.  

The VMware infrastructure used in the Intel DPDK virtualization solution includes:  

  VMXNET3 

  Virtual Distributed Switch 

  Direct assignment using either VMware vSphere® DirectPath I/O™ or SR-IOV 

Each of these elements is described in the sections below. 

VMXNET3  

Migrating legacy applications to a virtual environment can incur unwanted overhead. VMware 
VMXNET3 is a para-virtual network interface card (vNIC) that is optimized to provide high 
performance, high throughput, and predictable latency to ESXi virtual machines, while enabling 
advanced features such as vMotion and High Availability. Each virtual machine on an ESXi host 
can have up to 10 VMXNET3 virtual NICs. 

Virtual Distributed Switch  

VMware Virtual Distributed Switch (vDS) acts as a single, built-in Layer 2 switch across all 
associated hosts that are managed by administrators. The vDS infrastructure enables virtual 
machines to maintain a consistent network configuration. vDS is used to abstract physical 
network interfaces and provide access-level switching in the ESXi hypervisor.  

Direct Assignment 

Direct assignment using either VMware vSphere DirectPath I/O or SR-IOV allows guest operating 
systems to directly access an I/O device, bypassing the virtualization layer. This direct path, also 
called “passthrough”, can deliver higher performance for ESXi systems that utilize high speed I/O 
devices, such as 10 GbE. 

  vSphere DirectPath I/O. This option enables virtual machines to directly access physical PCI 

express adapters on platforms with an I/O memory management unit. This includes Intel® 
Xeon® processor 5500 series systems that feature an implementation of the I/O memory 
management unit (IOMMU), also called Intel® Virtual Technology for Directed I/O 
(Intel® VT‐d).  

 

S O L U T I O N   O V ER V I EW   / 7   

 

Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) with VMware vSphere ®   

For more information about vSphere DirectPath I/O, go to “Configuring VMDirectPath I/O 
pass-through devices on a VMware ESX or VMware ESXi host (1010789)” at: 
http://kb.vmware.com/kb/1010789.  

  Single Root I/O Virtualization (SR-IOV). This option allows the physical PCI Express adapter 

to be partitioned into multiple virtual functions using an industry-standard mechanism. A 
single physical NIC is enabled using an ESXi physical function driver or PF, and each 
partitioned virtual function is enabled using a virtual function driver or VF, for the specific 
guest operating system used in each virtual machine. For example, the Intel® 82599 10 
Gigabit Ethernet Controller (Niantic) can be partitioned into 63 VFs to assign to any virtual 
machines.  

In addition, Intel® DPDK 1.7 provides support for the Intel 40 GbE SR-IOV VF driver.  

VMware fully supports SR-IOV with an ecosystem and partners that can assist businesses to 
combine SR-IOV with best-of-breed virtualization. 

For more information about SR-IOV, go to “SR-IOV support status FAQ (2038739)” at: 
http://kb.vmware.com/kb/2038739  

The usage models for directly assigning PCI express devices to virtual machines are different 
between vSphere DirectPath I/O and SR-IOV, when used with Intel DPDK virtualization. These 
differences do not directly affect the overall design considerations for this solution.  

Solution Architecture 
As an introduction, typical workloads that do not require Intel DPDK use standard para-virtual 
device connectivity, which exposes the physical NIC using the VMXNET3 para-virtual network 
device as a standard Ethernet NIC. In this case, vSphere provides the connectivity between the 
physical NIC and the vNIC. The vNIC is used by the guest operating system TCP/IP networking 
stack and it offers the standard socket-based programming interface to applications in the virtual 
machine. 

 

S O L U T I O N   O V ER V I EW   / 8   

 

Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) with VMware vSphere ®   

Figure 3. Standard para-virtual device connectivity 

  

 
The ESXi hypervisor also supports the E1000 and E1000E virtual devices, which are emulations of 
Intel 1 GbE devices. Although each of these vNIC devices uses different implementation 
technologies, they provide a level of abstraction similar to that of the VMXNET3 para-virtual 
network device.  

However, for I/O intensive workloads that demand significantly higher packet throughput 
performance, the Intel DPDK virtualization solution can use either of the following connectivity 
types: 

 

Intel DPDK para-virtual device connectivity 

  Direct assignment connectivity 

Each of these solution architectures is described in the sections below.  

Intel DPDK Para-virtual Device Connectivity  

Intel DPDK para-virtual device connectivity provides an alternate, higher performance I/O data 
path to applications running in an ESXi virtual machine, as compared to the guest operating 
system TCP/IP stack with its socket-based application programming interface (API). 

 

S O L U T I O N   O V ER V I EW   / 9   

VMware ESXivSwitchVirtual MachineLinux KernelUnmodified AppVMXNET3Standard para-virtual device connectivity 

Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) with VMware vSphere ®   

Figure 4. Intel DPDK para-virtual device connectivity 

 

 
With Intel DPDK 1.6, Intel introduces built-in support for the VMXNET3 para-virtual NIC. Note 
that Intel DPDK on the VMware platform already provides support for the E1000 and E1000E 
virtual devices (introduced in DPDK 1.3.0).  

Intel DPDK para-virtual device connectivity fully enables all of the vSphere advanced 
virtualization features including vMotion, DRS, Fault Tolerance, High Availability, Snapshots, and 
others, which allows applications to be migrated, optimized, and then made cloud ready. 

Direct Assignment Connectivity  

Direct assignment using vSphere DirectPath I/O or SR-IOV with Intel DPDK can be used to 
migrate legacy applications to a virtualization environment. Both types of direct assignment 
connectivity can adjust the application environment to provide for near native packet 
performance, high throughput, and predictable latency, as compared to what is available 
through para-virtual NICs such as VMXNET3. 

 

S O L U T I O N   O V ER V I EW   / 10    

VMware ESXivSwitchVirtual MachineLinux KernelDPDK AppVMXNET3 

Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) with VMware vSphere ®   

Figure 5. Direct assignment connectivity 

 

 

 
However, when either vSphere DirectPath I/O or SR-IOV is used to migrate a legacy application, 
it bypasses the hypervisor layer for I/O, which disables the VMware advanced features that are 
needed to create a cloud-ready environment, including vMotion, DRS, Fault Tolerance, High 
Availability, Snapshots, and others. For example, because SR-IOV ties a virtual machine to the 
host, rapid service delivery cannot be provided because manual steps are required to provision 
each host.  

Intel DPDK in the Cloud 
With Intel DPDK and VMware vSphere, businesses can get the best of both the physical 
environment and virtual environment  all in one solution.  

Intel is committed to delivering cloud-ready support for Intel DPDK. With Intel DPDK 1.6, Intel 
introduces built-in support for the VMXNET3 para-virtual NIC, which makes all vSphere advanced 
features fully available. Note that Intel DPDK already provides support for the E1000 and E1000E 
virtual devices on the VMware platform.  

The Intel DPDK with VMware vSphere solution enables applications to be built with virtualization 
in mind. When used with Intel DPDK para-virtual device connectivity, the solution provides these 
key advantages: 

  Portability. When developed with Intel DPDK, an application can maintain a single code base 

as it is migrated from the physical environment to the virtualization environment. This 
provides for easier portability between physical and virtual environments, lower 
maintenance costs, and faster time-to-market.  

 

S O L U T I O N   O V ER V I EW   / 11    

VMware ESXivSwitchVirtual MachineLinux KernelDPDK AppIXGBEVirtual MachineLinux KernelDPDK AppIXGBE VFDirectPathI/OSR-IOV 

Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) with VMware vSphere ®   

In addition, the application can run on a broader set of hardware platforms with different 
physical NICs, as long as the physical NIC has a supported ESXi driver associated with it. 

  Performance. With Intel DPDK, a vNIC in a vSphere virtual machine can bypass the Linux 

kernel in the guest operating system, which gives the application direct access to the vNIC. 
Applications can be configured and tested to achieve significantly higher performance. In 
addition, Intel DPDK helps to minimize any application performance degradations by limiting 
the hypervisor overhead.  

  Agility. By using Intel DPDK para-virtual device connectivity, the solution can enable an agile, 

cloud-ready environment using vSphere advanced features, including vMotion, DRS, Fault 
Tolerance, High Availability, Snapshots, and others. The solution provides for business agility, 
automated provisioning, scalability, and lower CAPEX and OPEX.  

Certain Telecom applications will continue to have stringent network I/O performance 
requirements, after they are deployed to the virtualization environment. These key performance 
factors are packet throughput (due to the relatively small packet size), latency, and jitter. 

For this type of workload, it is important to consider the factors and trade-offs involved in 
providing for flexibility, innovation, and rapid deployment. Horizontal scalability is generally 
preferred over vertical density in order to provide better overall performance. This type of 
architecture should be the cornerstone for future-proofing next generation Telecom 
applications. 

Alternatively, Intel DPDK, in conjunction with either vSphere DirectPath I/O or SR-IOV 
connectivity, can be a viable option for migrating these types of  applications to the virtualization 
environment, especially when redesigning for horizontal architecture is either not possible or 
cost prohibitive.  

However, it is important to note that vSphere DirectPath I/O and SR-IOV cannot be used to 
enable a cloud-ready environment. When either one of these connectivity options is used to 
migrate a legacy application, it bypasses the hypervisor layer for I/O, which disables the VMware 
advanced features that are needed to build the cloud environment, thereby removing the key 
benefits that can be achieved through virtualization.  

For example, with vSphere DirectPath I/O, DRS can be deployed, but with limited availability only 
 the virtual machine can be part of a cluster, but it cannot migrate across hosts.  

In addition, because SR-IOV ties a virtual machine to the host, rapid service delivery cannot be 
provided since manual steps are required to provision each host. SR-IOV deployments can also 
be error prone when there are mismatches and incompatibilities between the VF driver in a 
virtual machine and the PF driver in the ESXi hypervisor, and this can potentially lead to system 
instability.  

 

S O L U T I O N   O V ER V I EW   / 12    

 

Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) with VMware vSphere ®   

Conclusion 
Businesses are caught between the increasing costs of infrastructure and decreasing margins. 
The Intel DPDK with VMware vSphere solution enables businesses to future proof applications to 
achieve the best of both the physical environment and virtual environment. 

Intel DPDK with VMware vSphere allows businesses to rapidly migrate applications requiring 
high packet performance to a virtualization environment. Working together with VMware, Intel 
is committed to delivering cloud-ready support using Intel DPDK para-virtual device connectivity. 
In fact, Intel DPDK 1.6 provides built-in support for the VMXNET3 para-virtual NIC. This solution 
provides the advantages of portability, performance, and agility. 

When the consideration for high packet performance is crucial, Intel DPDK can also be used with 
vSphere DirectPath I/O or SR-IOV to migrate applications to a virtualization environment.  
Although certain key benefits that provide for agility are lost, these connectivity options can be 
used as the “first step” in optimizing those applications.  

As your partner for SDDC and Network Functions Virtualization, VMware can help you assemble, 
test, and deploy the right virtualization solution to fit your core network needs and business 
strategy.  

 

S O L U T I O N   O V ER V I EW   / 13    

 

Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) with VMware vSphere ®   

Resources 
For more information about the Intel DPDK and VMware products discussed in this paper, view 
the links and references below. 

Intel References 

Intel DPDK 

  Packet Processing on Intel® Architecture: 

http://www.intel.com/go/dpdk  

  DPDK Community Project (Intel® DPDK: Data Plane Development Kit): 

http://dpdk.org/  

Intel Xeon Processor E7 / VMware vSphere 

  VMware vSphere™ 5.0 and the Intel® Xeon® Processor E7 Family: 

http://www.vmware.com/files/pdf/partners/intel/VMware-Intel-Datacenter-VTSB-Solution-
Brief.pdf  

  VMware vSphere™ 5.1 and the Intel® Xeon® Processor E7 Product Family: 

http://www.vmware.com/files/pdf/partners/intel/Intel-E7-VMware-vSphere-SB.pdf  

VMware References 

VMware vSphere 

  VMware vSphere Documentation: 

http://www.vmware.com/support/pubs/vsphere-esxi-vcenter-server-pubs.html  

  Performance Best Practices for VMware vSphere 5.5: 

http://www.vmware.com/pdf/Perf_Best_Practices_vSphere5.5.pdf 

 

Featured VMware Documentation Sets: 
http://www.vmware.com/support/pubs/  

  VMware Licensing Help Center: 

http://www.vmware.com/support/licensing/ 

VMware Community and TV  

  VMware Community, VMware Technology Network (VMTN): 

https://communities.vmware.com/community/vmtn  

  VMware Best Practices: 

https://communities.vmware.com/community/vmtn/bestpractices  

  VMware Community, VMware Knowledge Base: 

http://communities.vmware.com/community/vmtn/resources/knowledgebase  

  VMware Support Insider: 

http://blogs.vmware.com/kbtv/  

 

S O L U T I O N   O V ER V I EW   / 14    

 

Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) with VMware vSphere ®   

  VMware TV: 

http://www.youtube.com/user/vmwaretv  

  VMworld TV: 

http://www.youtube.com/user/VMworldTV  

  VMware KBTV (external): 

http://www.youtube.com/user/VMwareKB  

 

 

S O L U T I O N   O V ER V I EW   / 15    

 

Intel® Data Plane Development Kit (Intel® DPDK) with VMware vSphere ®   

Acknowledgements 
The following individuals contributed to the creation of this white paper: 

 

John DiGiglio, Software Product Marketing, Intel Corporation 

  Danny Lin, Director of Systems Engineering – GSAO (Global Strategic Alliances Organization), 

VMware 

  Bhavesh Davda, Senior Staff Engineer – Office of the CTO, VMware 

  Mike Richer, Telecom Systems Engineer – GSAO (Global Strategic Alliances Organization), 

VMware 

  Donna Reineck, Telecom PLM – vSphere Business Unit, VMware 

 

Jon Catanzano, Senior Technical Writer, Consultant 

 

 

 

S O L U T I O N   O V ER V I EW   / 16    

