 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware 

vCenter™ Site Recovery Manager 5.1 

and vSphere vMotion and High 

Availability 

 

  

 

 

April 2014 

DE P L O Y M E NT   A ND  T E CHN I CA L   CO NS I DE RA T I O NS   G UI DE  

 

 

Dis aster Recovery for praireFy re Media  Contact  Cent er using S ite  Recovery Manager 
Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 
 

 

Table of Contents 

Introduction ................................................................................................................3 

MicroStrategy Business Intelligence Suite ................................................................4 

VMware vCenter Site Recovery M anager ...................................................................5 

Recovery Testing Overview........................................................................................7 

Testing Architecture...................................................................................................8 

Testing Scenario ..................................................................................................... 14 

Testing Use Cases .................................................................................................. 15 

Test Workload Generation ....................................................................................... 15 

Test Site Installation ................................................................................................ 15 

Test Site Configuration ............................................................................................ 17 

Recovery Plan Execution ........................................................................................ 18 

Testing Results and Observations ........................................................................... 18 

Recommendations .................................................................................................. 19 

vSphere vMotion and High Availability Testing ....................................................... 20 

vMotion................................................................................................................... 21 

High Availability....................................................................................................... 21 

Conclusion................................................................................................................ 23 

Appendix A: Test System Configuration .................................................................. 24 

Resources ................................................................................................................. 27 

Acknowledgements .................................................................................................. 29 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001  www.vmware.com 
Copyri ght © 201 4 VMwar e, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and internati ona l copyrig ht and inte llectua l prop erty laws. VMware pr oducts are cover ed by on e or more pate nts listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. 

VMware is a reg istered tradem ark or trademark of VMwar e, Inc. in the United States and/or other juris dictio ns. All other marks and nam es mentio ned h erei n may  be tradem arks of their respective com pani es.   

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / I I    

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

Introduction 
Businesses using the MicroStrategy® Business Intelligence Suite depend heavily on the 
continuous availability of their information and processes in deployed application environments. 
Importantly, business want to ensure that their MicroStrategy business intelligence (BI) 
applications remain available in the event there is a major service disruption. However, due to 
the complexity and distributed nature the MicroStrategy BI application platform, implementing 
and maintaining  traditional disaster recovery solutions has proven to be complicated and costly.  

For this reason, MicroStrategy has been working together with VMware® to develop a joint 
disaster recovery solution using that meets the challenge of providing continuous availability in a 
manner that is simplified and cost efficient. For this solution, the MicroStrategy Business 
Intelligence Suite is run in a VMware vSphere® virtual environment in order to enable a scalable, 
resilient virtualized multi-tiered application solution.  

By running the Microsoft Strategy solution in a virtualization environment, MicroStrategy can 
deploy VMware® vCenter™ Site Recovery Manager™ to provide for disaster recovery. Site 
Recovery Manager provides for the reliable recovery of business critical applications within 
defined timeframes.  

MicroStrategy decided to use VMware vSphere virtualization technology and VMware vCenter 
Site Recovery Manager because it provides the optimal environment for a disaster recovery 
solution. Besides Site Recovery Manager, MicroStrategy is also using VMware vSphere advanced 
features, including VMware vSphere® vMotion® and VMware vSphere® High Availability (HA), to 
ensure the best operational performance. 

When a disaster occurs, businesses, at a minimum, initially want to renew operations in 
“survival” mode. They want to restore at least the business processes that are essential to keep 
the company running based on a predefined business impact analysis (BIA). Site Recovery 
Manager supports the recovery of critical business processes that are typically defined using two 
types of objectives: 

  Recovery Time Objective (RTO) – The RTO defines the criticality of each business process 
such as Finance or Call Center Operations and its dependencies in the event of a disaster. 
The RTO quantifies how rapidly the organization needs to have these business processes up 
and running. 

  Recovery Point Objective (RPO) – For each critical business process, the RPO quantifies the 

minimal amount of data to restore to ensure a successful recovery, and to “what point in 
time” the data needs to be restored, such as to the prior week or month. 

This paper describes the testing that was performed using MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter 
Site Recovery Manager, and with VMware vSphere vMotion and VMware vSphere High 
Availability. The Site Recovery Manager testing used block-based SAN storage and host-based 
replication to provide an effective availability solution for critical MicroStrategy deployments.  

This paper is written for experienced architects and engineers who are responsible for the 
VMware virtualization environment. It assumes that the reader has knowledge of the VMware 
and MicroStrategy products described in the paper.  

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 3    

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

MicroStrategy Business Intelligence Suite 
MicroStrategy is a leading provider of enterprise software including the MicroStrategy Analytics 
Platform™ and their Business Intelligence Suite. The MicroStrategy Business Intelligence (BI) 
platform supports a full range of analytic functionality, from easy-to-use business dashboards to 
sophisticated statistical analysis and data mining. This BI platform provides the flexibility 
businesses need to start small, and it scales to large enterprise deployments.  

The MicroStrategy Business Intelligence Suite consists of these modules: 

  Metadata Database Server. The MicroStrategy Metadata Database Server is a metadata 

repository (storage space) for all of the underlying reporting components and logical objects 
that form a MicroStrategy application. One metadata repository can hold multiple 
MicroStrategy projects. MicroStrategy Intelligence Server communicates with the metadata 
repository through Open Database Connectivity (ODBC) communication. Microsoft SQL 
Server and Oracle Database, as well as other database platforms are supported as metadata 
repositories. 

  Data Warehouse. The Data Warehouse is the foundation of the MicroStrategy platform. The 

Data Warehouse stores data from the MicroStrategy Business Intelligence Suite for later 
analysis. Typically, an extraction, transformation, and loading (ETL) process is used to place 
or load data into the Data Warehouse The ETL process usually uses an online transaction 
processing (OLTP) system as its main source of original data. 

  MicroStrategy Intelligence Server. This server is the heart of the MicroStrategy Business 
Intelligence Suite. The MicroStrategy Intelligence Server executes reports and documents 
that are stored in metadata against the data warehouse. It passes the results of those 
reports and documents on to the end-users. 

  MicroStrategy Web. The MicroStrategy web allows end-users to perform interactive analysis 
through a web browser. MicroStrategy Web provides a full set of data browsing, drilling, and 
reporting development capabilities that enable “stream of consciousness” navigation. 
Boardroom-quality reports can be generated using a wide range of charting and formatting 
options. MicroStrategy Web can be run on ASP.NET and JavaServer Pages (JSP) web 
application servers. 

  MicroStrategy Mobile. This web service provides an interface that enables end-users to 

consume MicroStrategy reports and documents using Apple® iOS (previously iPhone OS) and 
Android based mobile devices. Users access MicroStrategy content through the 
MicroStrategy Mobile application available using the device’s application store. 
MicroStrategy Mobile is supported to run on ASP.NET and JSP web application servers.  

In addition, MicroStrategy is the leading provider of the enterprise-class MicroStrategy Mobile 
App Platform™, MicroStrategy Identity Platform™, and MicroStrategy Loyalty Platform™. This 
platform enables businesses to build, deploy, and maintain mobile apps across a range of 
solutions by embedding business intelligence, transactions, and multimedia into application 
solutions. Note that these MicroStrategy platforms were not included in the testing described in 
this paper.  

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 4    

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

The MicroStrategy cloud offering combines the MicroStrategy platforms with third party 
software, hardware, and services to enable rapid, cost-effective development of hosted business 
intelligence, mobile, and social applications. The cloud offering is hosted by MicroStrategy, 
rather than being hosted on-premise by the customer. 

For more information on MicroStrategy and the Business Intelligence Suite, see the “Resources” 
section near the end of this paper. 

VMware vCenter Site Recovery Manager  
VMware vCenter Site Recovery Manager is the market-leading product that ensures the simplest 
and most reliable disaster protection for all virtualized applications. Site Recovery Manager 
leverages cost-efficient vSphere Replication and supports broad set of high performance 
storage-replication products to replicate virtual machines from a Protected Site to a Recovery 
Site, and to provide for failback. Site Recovery Manager automates its recovery processes to 
provide for rapid recovery within predefined RPOs and RTOs.  

Site Recovery Manager is an extension to VMware vCenter that simplifies and automates 
disaster recovery to ensure reliability and operational performance. When the MicroStrategy 
Business Intelligence Suite virtualization solution runs as a workload in a VMware environment, 
Site Recovery Manager can orchestrate disaster recovery and integrate failover with other 
virtualized enterprise applications.  

Site Recovery Manager greatly simplifies testing and it saves significant time and resources by: 

 

Simplifying and automating disaster recovery workflows. 

  Ensuring reliable recovery by enabling non-disruptive testing.  

 

Simplifying recovery by eliminating complex manual recovery steps and by centralizing the 
management of recovery plans. 

Disaster recovery testing is used to validate business continuity plans for recovering from a 
disaster, and restoring partially or completely interrupted critical functions within 
predetermined timeframes (RTOs and RPOs). Previous, regular testing of recovery plans using 
Site Recovery Manager is critical to achieving a successful recovery at the time of an actual 
disaster.  

With Site Recovery Manager, recovery plans can be tested non-disruptively as frequently as 
required. Unlike other solutions, Site Recovery Manager recovery plan testing minimizes the use 
of resources, even with extremely complex disaster recovery plans. It provides a simple interface 
for setting up recovery plans that are coordinated across all infrastructure layers, replacing 
traditional, error-prone runbooks.  

Site Recovery Manager is a disaster recovery solution that allows businesses to plan, test, and 
execute a scheduled migration or emergency failover of vCenter inventory from one site to 
another.  By using virtualization, Site Recovery Manager can be used to test virtual machines and 
network connections as “walled-off” virtual entities. This testing can be co-resident with 
production applications that might be running at the recovery site.  

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 5    

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

The typical architecture for Site Recovery Manager includes storage array replication between 
the Protected Site and the Recovery Site, as shown in the figure below. 

Figure 2. Typical architecture for vCenter Site Recovery Manager 

 

 
Site Recovery Manager is an optional component of VMware vCenter. Site Recovery Manager 
allows disaster recovery tasks to be executed from the same centralized interface that is used to 
manage other administrative virtual machine tasks, such as creation, migration, and deletion.  

 

However, Site Recovery Manager is not a built-in component of VMware® vCenter™. It is a 
separate server process with its own database that can co-exist on the same server as vCenter, 
or Site Recover Manager and vCenter can reside on separate servers. Similarly, both the Site 
Recovery Manager and vCenter data repositories can be created in a single database, or in 
separate databases. 

Site Recovery Manager relies on the components below: 

  Replication of virtual machines to a secondary site. Site Recovery Manager requires an 

underlying replication product to copy virtual machine data to a secondary site. Replication 
can be provided either using built-in vSphere Replication or by a third party, storage-based 
replication product. vSphere Replication provides cost efficient and simple replication for 
smaller sites and Tier 2 applications. Storage-based replication is mostly used for business-
critical environments. 

 

 

Integration with a replication product. Site Recovery Manager integrates with the 
underlying replication product through a storage vendor supplied Storage Replication 
Adapter (SRA) plug-in. The SRA plug-in enables Site Recovery Manager to determine which 
virtual machines are being replicated and to coordinate the execution of recovery plans with 
the replication layer. 

Integration with vCenter Server. Site Recovery Manager requires separate vCenter Server 
instances at both the Protected Site and Recovery Site. Site Recovery Manager instances are 
deployed at both sites, and these instances integrate directly with local vCenter Server 
instances. 

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 6    

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

  Set up of recovery plans. Site Recovery Manager provides an intuitive interface to enable 
the creation of recovery plans for different failover scenarios. This interface allows users to 
map production resources to recovery resources. It identifies which virtual machines to 
protect and their relative boot sequences, as well as which lower priority virtual machines to 
suspended at the Recovery Site. Users can also include custom scripts and automatically 
reconfigure IP addresses for their virtual machines. 

Besides providing for automated disaster recovery, Site Recovery Manager can be used in other 
scenarios, such as to provide for high availability and business continuity, where a “actual” 
disaster has not occurred. These scenarios include: 

  Planned or unplanned extended power outages. While not considered an actual “disaster”, 

an extended power outage such as in a hospital environment could result in a patient care 
disaster. In this scenario, Site Recovery Manager can be utilized to quickly and effectively 
bring business critical services back online. 

  Datacenter evacuation, planned or unplanned. Perhaps, as part of their disaster recovery 

plan, a site requires a planned failover to a secondary site. Using Site Recovery Manager, this 
failover to a secondary site can first be tested and executed/failed over in a very short 
period of time. 

  Datacenter migration. By using Site Recovery Manager with host-based replication or array-

based replication, a datacenter migration can be performed with minimal downtime.  

Recovery Testing Overview 
The functional testing scenario for disaster recovery was performed jointly by MicroStrategy and 
VMware using the MicroStrategy virtualization solution and related products running on 
VMware vSphere 5.1 with VMware vCenter Site Recovery Manager 5.1.  

The goals of this functional testing are as follows: 

  Verify that the MicroStrategy solution can fail over to the Recovery Site using Site Recovery 

Manager with array-based replication and vSphere Replication, without corrupting the 
asynchronous replication.  

  Verify that all “test bubble”, “actual failover” and “failback” testing is performed without 

issue and MicroStrategy solution components fail over successfully.  

The results of the functional testing prove that Site Recovery Manager provides a flexible, high-
performance, high availability platform for disaster recovery that works well when the 
MicroStrategy solution runs in a VMware environment. 

The functional testing scenario for the MicroStrategy solution is described below: 

  Testing architecture 

  Testing scenario 

  Testing use cases 

  Test workload generation 

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 7    

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

  Test site installation 

  Test site configuration 

  Recovery plan execution 

  Testing results and observations 

  Recommendations 

Each of these topics is described in the sections below.  

Testing Architecture 

The MicroStrategy solution architecture with Site Recovery Manager is described in the sections 
below.  

MicroStrategy Solution Architecture 

The solution architecture that was used to perform disaster recovery testing on MicroStrategy 
workloads with Site Recovery Manager is shown in the figure below. The MicroStrategy solution 
architecture used array-based replication and host-based replication across two sites.  

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 8    

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

Figure 1. MicroStrategy solution architecture for testing 

 

Site Recovery Manager Architecture 

Disaster recovery testing with Site Recovery Manager requires the virtual machines in the 
secondary site to start by using storage that provides a snapshot of the target logical unit 
numbers (LUNs). This practice ensures that the test is run against a storage infrastructure that is 
isolated from the production environment. 

 

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 9    

 MicroStrategy MetadataData WarehouseMicroStrategyIntelligence ServerMicroStrategyWeb/MobileOptional Load BalancerApplication HA ClusterHTTPODBC 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

Figure 2. Site Recovery Manager architecture 

 

The testing architecture is described below:  

1.  The lab environments for the Protected Site and Recovery Site were built in two VMware 

datacenters in Palo Alto, California, with the sites located approximately 12 miles apart. 

  The Protected Site and the Recovery Site each run a VMware vCenter Server in a virtual 

machine. Each vCenter Server runs in a virtual machine in order to take advantage of 
vSphere advanced features including VMware vSphere vMotion and VMware vSphere 
High Availability.  

  The Protected Site and Recovery Site are configured using the NetApp® FAS 3020 storage 

platform.  

2.  Site Recovery Manager is installed on independent vCenter servers both at the Protected 

Site and Recovery Site in order to enable communication between these sites. 

3.  All virtual machines were configured using VMware Virtual Machine File System (VMFS) 

storage. 

4.  MicroStrategy application components were registered as machine services to start on boot. 

5.  For data replication, the storage platforms used at both the Protected Site and Recovery Site 

were configured using asynchronous replication mode to replicate all of the related LUNs 
from the primary storage to secondary storage on the NetApp storage platform. Both array-
based and host-based replication was tested: 

  Asynchronous replication is supported with Site Recovery Manager, although it might 

result in minimal data loss during failover. (Contact the storage vendor for detailed 
information.)  

  Synchronous solution with Site Recovery Manager is supported, although it was not 

included in this testing. Synchronous replication is the preferred storage area network 
(SAN) replication strategy for business critical data because there is negligible risk of 
data loss in the event of failover.  

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 1 0   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

6.  Connectivity between MicroStrategy application components were specified with Domain 

Name System (DNS) names instead of IPs. DNS is set up with its routing capability enabled.  

7.  After the MicroStrategy server at the Protected Site fails over to the Recovery Site, the new 

IP address is automatically registered in DNS.  

8.  Once the MicroStrategy server is up and running, communication is established through a 

fully qualified domain name (FQDN). 

9.  MicroStrategy Web and Mobile were configured to automatically reconnect with the 

Intelligence Server once either service is restarted. 

10.  MicroStrategy related services (database, MicroStrategy Intelligence Server, web server 

hosting MicroStrategy Web and Mobile) were configured to start on machine boot. 

For more information, see the “Resources” section near the end of this paper. 

Array-based Replication 

An array-based replication setup requires one or more storage arrays at the Protected Site to 
replicate data to peer arrays at the Recovery Site. Storage replication adapters (SRAs) are used to 
integrate Site Recovery Manager with a wide variety of vendor storage arrays. To use array-
based replication with Site Recovery Manager, the replication needs to be configured first, and 
then Site Recovery Manager can be configured to use it. 

Some of the properties of array-based replication include: 

  Use the same storage solution, at least the same brand for other vendors. With EMC, use 

Recoverpoint for heterogeneous arrays. 

  Replicate the data on the centralized storage solution (SAN).  

  An unlimited number of virtual machines can be replicated depending on the capacity, 

distance between the locations, and available bandwidth. 

Figure 4: Array-based replication 

 

 

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 1 1   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

Host-based Replication 

Site Recovery Manager supports host-based replication, which eliminates the need to maintain 
an identical storage array at the Recovery Site. It enables the use of low cost, direct-attached 
storage (DAS) for disaster recovery purposes, and it allows for more granular, virtual machine 
level replication.  

vSphere Replication is a feature of Site Recovery Manager that enables disaster recovery to 
protect individual virtual machines, without requiring array-based replication. This host-based 
replication feature is licensed as part of the Site Recovery Manager product. 

vSphere Replication enables these use cases: 

  Allows per virtual machine replication for Site Recovery Manager.  

  Can use Site Recovery Manager without requiring array-based replication.  

  Enables virtual machine replication between heterogeneous arrays. 

In addition, Site Recovery Manager can be deployed to protect virtual machines, regardless of 
which Hardware Compatibility List (HCL) supported storage is used at Protected Site or the 
Recovery Site. 

Figure 3: Host-based replication 

 
Some of the differences between array-based replication and vSphere Replication (host-based 
replication) are described in the table below. 

 

Array-based replication versus Host-based replication com parison 

Array-based replication 

Host-based replication 

  Replication is using storage layer. 

  Replication is using vSphere/hypervisor layer. 

  Data on the centralized storage solution only 

  Replication of local or direct-attached storage is 

can be replicated. 

possible. 

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 1 2   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

Array-based replication 

Host-based replication 

  Unlimited number of virtual machines can be 

  A maximum of 500 virtual machines can be 

replicated, depending on the capacity, 
distance between the locations, and available 
bandwidth. 

replicated. 

  Replication is configured per LUN/VMFS or 

  Replication can be configured per virtual 

NFS volume. 

machine. 

  Can replicate virtual machine templates. 

  Cannot replicate virtual machine templates. 

 
For more information about vSphere Replication, see the “Resources” section near the end of 
this paper.  

Storage Replication Adapter 

With Site Recovery Manager, disaster recovery becomes an integrated part of managing the 
VMware virtual infrastructure. The Storage Replication Adapter (SRA) is a vendor-supplied plug-
in that is installed on the Site Recovery Manager server to manage communication with the 
storage platform. The SRA for the NetApp storage platform used in this testing scenario is tightly 
integrated with vCenter, vSphere, and NetApp storage replication technologies, as described 
below.  

For asynchronous testing, the NetApp SRA plugin was installed on the vCenter servers at the 
Protected Site and Recovery Site to facilitate the Site Recovery Manager testing workflow, and to 
create a clone of the replicated LUNs to synchronize data between the two sites. For this testing, 
the schedule for replicating changed or updated data from primary storage to secondary storage 
device was every 60 seconds. 

SAN Storage and Data Replication 

For this testing, Site Recovery Manager was used with the NetApp FAS 3020 storage platform 
and NetApp® SnapMirror® 1.4.3 technology using the SRA for NetApp, as described below. Site 
Recovery Manager has been tested and deployed in a variety of storage area network (SAN) 
environments.  

Site Recovery Manager works in conjunction with NetApp SnapMirror array-based replication 
technology through the NetApp Storage Replication Adapter(SRA). NetApp SnapMirror is easily 
configured using NetApp® ONTAPI® CLI or FilerView. 

For a complete list of storage platforms that are compatible with VMware, see the “Resources” 
section near the end of this paper.  

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 1 3   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

Testing Scenario 

In this scenario, the testing goals are to verify that Site Recovery Manager can enable disaster 
recovery in deployments that run in a VMware environment. These goals include:  

  Demonstrate that the MicroStrategy solution can run successfully with Site Recovery 

Manager to enable disaster recovery in deployments that run in VMware vSphere 5.1:  

  Confirm that the MicroStrategy server can fail over to the Recovery Site using Site 

Recovery Manager with asynchronous replication, and maintain application functionality 
without corrupting the in-use databases.  

Site Recovery Manager also supports a synchronous solution, although it was not 
included in this approach.  

  Confirm that both the users and the MicroStrategy servers can regain connectivity once 

these applications are running at the Recovery Site. 

The testing scenario was performed as described below: 

 

For Site Recovery Manager, as virtual machines at the Protected Site are shut down, virtual 
machines at the Recovery Site start up and use data replicated from the Protected Site to 
provide the same services.  

In this scenario:  

  The two datacenters are not synchronized in real time (asynchronous replication), 

although the lag time for replication is just a few seconds. Failover and recovery require 
only a few minutes. 

  Site Recovery Manager controls the transfer of services by using a recovery plan that 

specifies the order in which virtual machines shut down and start up, compute 
resources are allocated, and network access is given.  

 

It enables fast and accurate recovery by maintaining duplicate copies automatically 
when data spanning multiple volumes and storage systems is replicated across long 
distances. 

Site Recovery Manager enables the testing of recovery plans in a way that does not disrupt the 
ongoing operations at either site. For example, Site Recovery Manager can: 

  Create a temporary copy of the replicated data to test the failover process and ensure that 

the secondary image is consistent and usable.  

  Rely on independent vCenter servers both at the Protected Site and Recovery Site to 

facilitate the failover process.  

For more information, see the “Resources” section near the end of this paper. 

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 1 4   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

Testing Use Cases  

The tests cases that were executed during this testing scenario include: 

1.  Use MicroStrategy Integrity Manager to run a set of reports and documents and compare 

the results against an established known-good baseline. 

2.  Connect to the following MicroStrategy components to verify correct execution of a set of 

reports: 

  MicroStrategy Intelligence Server 

  MicroStrategy Web 

  MicroStrategy Mobile 

3.  Use MicroStrategy Command Manager to trigger the execution of a set of email 

subscriptions and verify correct delivery. 

4.  Connect to MicroStrategy Mobile using an Apple iOS-based device and verify browsing and 

report/document execution capabilities. 

5.  Connect to MicroStrategy Web and verify correct operation of data input and write-back 

features. 

6.  Verify correct reformation of a MicroStrategy Intelligence Server cluster. 

7.  Verify correct reformation of the MicroStrategy Health Center topology. 

Test Workload Generation 

The testing of MicroStrategy with Site Recovery Manager was performed using MicroStrategy 
Integrity Manager in Baseline versus Project mode. The MicroStrategy Tutorial project was used 
for the workload. Integrity Manager was configured to compare SQL and grid results returned 
for reports, and execution results for documents. 

Project 

Number of reports 

Number of documents 

MicroStrategy Tutorial 

660 

143 

 

Test Site Installation 

This section provides a high level overview of Site Recovery Manager installation and 
configuration. For detailed configuration information, see “Appendix A” later in this paper.  

1. 

Install Site Recovery Manager server at the Protected Site and Recovery Site. In this test 
scenario, Site Recovery Manager was installed on a separate virtual machine.  

2. 

Install the Site Recovery Manager plug-in to vCenter: 

  When array-based replication is used, install the SRAs on the Site Recovery Manager 

server at each site, as described below. 

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 1 5   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

  When host-based replication is used, configure the replication at host level, as described 

below. 

The hardware and software configuration for array-based replication and host-based replication 
is described in the sections below. 

Array-based Replication 

Configuring the solution architecture for array-based replication includes these steps: 

1.  Configure storage arrays at the primary and secondary sites. 

2.  Create LUNs on the Protected Site storage and expose them to Protected Site VMware® ESX® 

host server.  

3.  Configure storage replication between primary and secondary site storage arrays.  

4. 

5. 

Install vCenter Server 5.1 on two Windows virtual machines. These virtual machines serve as 
the Protected Site and Recovery Site vCenter Server instances. 

Install and configure Site Recovery Manager on the Protected Site and Recovery Site vCenter 
Server instances. See the ”Test Site Configuration” section for detailed information.  

Site Recovery Manager can be installed as a separate standalone virtual machine or use the 
same database server to support the vCenter database instance and the Site Recovery 
Manager database instance. 

6. 

Install MicroStrategy virtual machines on the Protected Site. 

After installation, the Site Recovery Manager plug-in is available and can be accessed via the 
vSphere or VMware Infrastructure (VI) Client.  

For more information on installation and configuration, see the “Resources” section near the 
end of this paper. 

Host Based Replication 

Configuring the solution architecture for host-based replication includes these steps: 

1.  Configure host-based replication between Protected Site and Recovery Site.  

2.  Configure vCenter Server 5.1. These virtual machines serve as Protected Site and Recovery 

Site vCenter Server instances. 

3. 

Install MicroStrategy virtual machines on the Protected Site. 

For this testing, Site Recovery Manager enables the VMware environment at the Protected Site 
and Recovery Site to communicate. See the “Test Site Configuration” section for detailed 
information. 

For more about Site Recovery Manager installation and configuration, see the “Resources” 
section near the end of this paper. 

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 1 6   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

Test Site Configuration 

For this solution architecture, the Protected Site and the Recovery Site are configured as 
described in the sections below. 

Protected Site 

Configuring the Protected Site includes these steps: 

1.  Configure the connection between the Site Recovery Manager servers at the Protected Site 

and Recovery Site. 

2. 

Install the SRAs for NetApp FAS 3020 1.4.3 and configure ArrayManager using Site Recovery 
Manager. 

3.  Configure the array-based or the hosted-based replication. 

4.  Configure the inventory preferences that provide the mappings between compute resources 

and virtual machine folders. Configure the networks on the Protected Site and their 
counterparts on the Recovery Site.  

  To configure the mappings, go to the Site Recovery Manager, Administration Guide refer 

to “configure inventory preferences”) at: 
https://pubs.vmware.com/srm-51/topic/com.vmware.ICbase/PDF/srm-admin-5-1.pdf 

5.  Create a Protection Group named MicroStrategy-Protection for the virtual machines at the 

Protected Site. 

Site Recovery Manager can be used to add virtual machines that share common resources to 
Protection Groups at the Protected Site. Protection Groups can be configured into recovery 
plans for restoration at the Recovery Site. 

Recovery Site 

Configuring the Recovery Site includes these steps: 

1.  Create a recovery plan named MicroStrategy-Recovery. 

2. 

In the recovery plan, enable the option to suspend non-critical virtual machines that are 
running at the Recovery Site in the event of a disaster to maximize the available computing 
resources.  

Typically, the hardware resources at the Recovery Site are used to host non-critical virtual 
machines during normal operations such as Test and Dev instances. 

3.  Prioritize the start order of the virtual machines as required. Create a customization 

specification for the virtual machines to enable them to start up on the Recovery Site using a 
different subnet than the Protected Site.  

Do not create a custom specification and configure the virtual machines to start up in a 
private test “bubble” network using the same networking parameters as the Protected Site. 

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 1 7   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

4.  On as-needed basis, create a post power-on command to execute the script on the virtual 

machines after failover. 

Recovery Plan Execution 

Execute the recovery plan using Site Recovery Manager includes these steps: 

1.  Break the NetApp SnapMirror relationships between the Protected Site and Recovery Site. 

2.  Map the LUNs to the existing NetApp snapshots.  

3.  Trigger the disaster recovery ESX hosts to rescan and detect the storage. 

4.  Suspend any non-critical virtual machines at the Recovery site such as Test or Dev instances, 

in order to maximize the available computing resources. 

5.  Reconfigure the virtual machines as defined for the network at the Recovery Site. 

6.  Power on the virtual machines in the order that was defined in the recovery plan. 

7.  After boot up, the MicroStrategy server automatically receives the new IP address that was 

customized  during the initial configuration steps. 

  For more information, go to the Site Recovery Manager Administration Guide (refer to 

“IP address mapping ”) at: 
https://pubs.vmware.com/srm-51/topic/com.vmware.ICbase/PDF/srm-admin-5-1.pdf 

Testing Results and Observations 

The testing results demonstrate that Site Recovery Manager provides a flexible, high 
performance, high availability platform for disaster recovery. It is fully compatible with 
MicroStrategy solutions that run in a VMware virtualization environment. As a result of this 
testing, MicroStrategy supports using Site Recovery Manager with the MicroStrategy Business 
Intelligence Suite.  

The testing exercised the MicroStrategy server using a test workload with forced failover. During 
the failover process, the server was not responsive until it was fully up and running at the 
Recovery Site. After failover, the MicroStrategy software was tested on the virtual machine at 
the Recovery Site. 

After the testing of Site Recovery Manager was completed, it was observed that:  

  All of the virtual machines were cleanly powered on at the Recovery Site. 

  The server responded to its name properly at the new IP address location.  

  When the MicroStrategy server was fully online, users were able to connect to the server at 

the new location without issue. 

  All of the testing on MicroStrategy software passed without issue.  

  There were no errors to indicate any significant data loss or data contamination.  

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 1 8   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

The testing included running workloads in an asynchronous configuration only. In this scenario, 
the potential for data loss was minimal, and it could be anticipated. However, data loss can be 
minimized within the NetApp array by reducing the synchronization window schedule and/or by 
using other types of complementary data protection technologies. 

When avoiding data loss is considered a significant issue, the recovery plan might require a 
synchronous solution. 

Using the MicroStrategy virtualization solution with Site Recovery Manager provides these 
advantages:  

  Gets you back in business rapidly and allows customers to avoid loss by expediting failover 

and recovery in alignment with predefined RTOs and RPOs.  

  Ensures that business critical applications are protected using built-in disaster recovery 

features that are highly and continually available, redundant, and fully recoverable. 

  Accelerates disaster recovery by minimizing its inherent risks and removing the causes for  

downtime, such as by eliminating manual recovery steps.  

  Delivers advanced capabilities for disaster recovery management, non-disruptive testing, 

and automated failover, especially with long distance replication.  

  Enables automated failover across geographically-dispersed locations. 

  Requires minimal administration and minimal additional hardware. 

  Enables customers to expand protection to other important systems and applications. 

Recommendations  

Based on the testing results, the recommendations for achieving the best performance in 
implementing the MicroStrategy solution using Site Recovery Manager are described below.  

For more information about using Site Recovery Manager, see the “Resources” section near the 
end of this paper.  

1. 

Install the Site Recovery Manager database close to the Site Recovery Manager server to 
reduce the effect of round trips on recovery time performance. Use the same database 
server to support the vCenter database instance and the Site Recovery Manager database 
instance.  

2.  Enable faster testing and actual recovery by grouping virtual machines under fewer 

Protection Groups. Ensure that the virtual machines have no constraints preventing them 
from being added to similar Protection Groups.  

3.  Enable VMware vSphere® Distributed Resource Scheduler™ (DRS) at the Recovery Site. 

Migrations might occur as DRS tries to load balance the cluster during recovery.  

4.  Enable VMware vSphere® Distributed Power Management™ (DPM) on Recovery Site clusters 

when the Recovery Site hosts are in a Standby state. This ensures that adequate physical 
resources are available at the Recovery Site. More hosts lead to increased concurrency for 
recovering virtual machines and enabling shorter recovery times.  

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 1 9   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

If DPM is not enabled and the hosts are in a standby state, bring the hosts out of standby 
mode manually. Drag and drop shadow virtual machines on them.  

5.  Chart the dependencies between virtual machines. Define recovery priorities and assign 

virtual machines to appropriate Protection Groups to reduce overall failover times. Ensure 
that only a certain number of required virtual machines are assigned a high priority. High 
priority Protection Groups power up virtual machines sequentially. In contrast, medium and 
low Protection Groups power up virtual machines in parallel.  

6.  As an alternative to placing virtual machines in a high priority group, separate all of the 

virtual machines to be recovered into two logical groups: 

  Group1 with level 1 virtual machines – Place Group1 virtual machines in the normal 

priority group. 

  Group2 with level 2 virtual machines (dependent upon virtual machines in Group1) – 

Place Group2 virtual machines in the low priority group within the same plan. 

This maintains dependency across both of these logical groups and reduces the recovery 
time by introducing more concurrency for these Protection Groups. Maintain dependency 
between priority groups. There is no dependency across virtual machines within a single 
priority group.  

7. 

It is strongly recommended that VMware Tools be installed in all protected virtual machines 
in order to accurately acquire their heartbeats and network change notifications. 

8.  Specify a non-replicated datastore for swap files to speed up replication between the two 
sites and remote calls to vCenter Server, and to avoid wasting network bandwidth. During 
recovery, delete swap files for all virtual machines in order to speed up the recovery. 

9.  Make sure any internal script or call-out prompt does not block recovery indefinitely.  

10.  VMware recommends a minimum of two ESX hosts at the Recovery Site. Although this is not 

a requirement, having two ESX hosts ensures availability for VMware services, such as for 
VMware vSphere vMotion and High Availability, and it improves the recovery time.  

11.  Site Recovery Manager relies on the capabilities of the storage platform for failover. 

Recovery time can vary depending on the SAN vendor, replication type, and other factors. It 
can take from 5 to 10 minutes to make the changes to the back-end storage. Follow VMware 
best practices for Site Recovery Manager, along with the SAN vendor’s best practices, to 
ensure an optimal recovery time.  

vSphere vMotion and High Availability Testing 
This testing scenario demonstrates that the VMware advanced features, including VMware 
vSphere vMotion and High Availability, can increase IT agility and improve the operational 
performance of the MicroStrategy solution. vSphere vMotion and High Availability are fully 
compatible with MicroStrategy deployments that run in a virtual environment. As a result of this 
testing, MicroStrategy supports using vMotion and High Availability with MicroStrategy solutions 
that run in a virtualization environment.  

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 2 0   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

vMotion 

VMware vSphere vMotion keeps your IT environment up and running, providing the flexibility 
and availability needed to meet the increasing demands of the business, with no end user 
impact. vMotion enables the live migration of running virtual machines from one physical server 
to another with zero downtime, continuous service availability, and complete transaction 
integrity. This capability makes hardware maintenance possible at any time and vMotion does 
not require clustering or redundant servers. In addition, vMotion can move online workloads 
from one ESX Server host machine to another in order to maintain service levels and 
performance goals. 

Figure 3. VMw are vSphere vMotion 

 

Testing Results 

vMotion was successfully tested with different components of the MicroStrategy Business 
Intelligence platform, including Intelligence Server, Mobile, and Web. Once the vMotion testing 
completed, it was verified to confirm that all MicroStrategy components successfully executed 
reports in regards to the MicroStrategy components. In addition, MicroStrategy Command 
Manager was tested to trigger the execution of a set of email subscriptions and verify correct 
delivery. 

High Availability 

VMware vSphere High Availability can be enabled with many applications running in virtual 
machines require, independent of its operating system or underlying hardware configuration, 
and the application running on it. High Availability provides uniform, cost effective failover 
protection from hardware and operating system failures in a virtualized IT environment by:  

  Monitoring virtual machines to detect operating system and hardware failures.  

  Restarting virtual machines on other physical servers in the resource pool, without manual 

intervention, when a server failure is detected. 

  Protecting applications from operating system failures by automatically restarting virtual 

machines when an operating system failure is detected. 

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 2 1   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

Figure 5. VMw are vSphere High Availability  

 

Testing Results 

This failover testing was performed using the MicroStrategy Intelligence Server and Mobile 
server with High Availability and these tests were completed successfully. High Availability 
failover was performed after an ESX host failure was detected. The MicroStrategy virtual 
machine was restarted on a different ESX host in the cluster, without human intervention.  

All of the services on the virtual machine were started automatically and no failures were 
observed. After High Availability was triggered, the MicroStrategy virtual machine rebooted on 
the other host in the cluster in minutes. All application services started automatically without 
issues.  

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 2 2   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

Conclusion 
VMware vCenter Site Recovery Manager provides for effective and automated disaster recovery 
in a MicroStrategy solution that run in a virtualization environment. For this testing, a multi-tier 
MicroStrategy application was deployed on VMware virtual infrastructure.  

By using Site Recovery Manager for disaster recovery, the MicroStrategy deployment gained 
these advantages: 

  Accelerates recovery for the virtual environment through automation. The recovery of 

MicroStrategy virtual machines into a different subnet on the secondary site is fully 
automated. 

  Ensures reliable recovery by enabling non-disruptive testing. Recovery plan testing can be 

conducted as many times as required to satisfy auditing requirements. 

 

Simplifies recovery by eliminating complex manual recovery steps and centralizing recovery 
plan management. 

  Provides for the successful testing of the failback scenario both with array-based and host-

based replication. 

When the MicroStrategy solution runs in the VMware vSphere virtual environment, the solution 
provides for IT agility, including disaster recovery capabilities. This paper described each of the 
functional testing scenarios that were performed using MicroStrategy with Site Recovery 
Manager. In addition to disaster recovery, the MicroStrategy solution was tested with VMware 
vSphere vMotion and High Availability to ensure that is delivers the best operational 
performance.  

For each scenario, all of the tests were performed without issue. The testing results for each 
scenario demonstrate that the MicroStrategy components provided the functionality needed to 
work successfully in a virtualization environment that is powered by VMware. 

In a disaster, Site Recovery Manager can be used to support di saster recovery for business 
critical applications running in a VMware environment. For this testing, Site Recovery Manager 
enables the rapid recovery of resources within defined RTO and RPO timeframes using an 
asynchronous solution. The testing demonstrates that Site Recovery Manager works well with 
MicroStrategy software solutions.  

Note that Site Recovery Manager also supports a synchronous solution, although it was not 
included in this testing. Synchronous replication is the preferred SAN replication strategy for 
business critical data because there is negligible risk of data loss in the event of failover.   

 

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 2 3   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

Appendix A: Test System Configuration 
Appendix A describes the configuration of the solution architecture for MicroStrategy testing 
with VMware, as described in this paper. This includes the hardware and host configuration, 
installed software, and virtual machine configuration, as shown in the tables below.  

Hardware and Host Configuration 

Table 1 describes the configuration of the physical hardware including VMware ESX® host 
servers and storage. 

Table 1. Hardw are configuration for solution architecture 

Hardware 

Servers 

Configuration 

  Protected site: 2 HP® Proliant blade server, 480c G1 servers  

Each server is equipped with: 

 

 

3 GHz dual quad-core Intel Xeon (R) E5450 

48 GB RAM 

  Recovery site: 1 Hewlett-Packard Proliant blade server, 480c 

G1 server  

Each server is equipped with: 

  2.3 GHz dual quad-core Xeon (R) E5410 

  32 GB RAM 

Storage platform 
(Protected Site and Recovery Site) 

  1 NetApp FAS 3020 with SnapMirror 1.4.3, 300 GB LUN  

(each site)  

Installed Software 

Table 2 lists the vendor software installed for this solution. 

Table 2. Softw are for solution architecture 

Software Provider 

Software Configuration 

VMware  

Microsoft 

Oracle 

  VMware vSphere 5.1, vCenter Server 5.1, ESX 5.1, Site Recovery Manager 5.1 

  Microsoft® SQL Server™ 2008 R2, Enterprise Edition 

  Oracle® Database 11g R2 

MicroStrategy  

  MicroStrategy 9.3.0 

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 2 4   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

Virtual Machine Configuration 

Table 3 describes the configuration of virtual machines running on ESX host servers that were 
used to implement this solution.  

Table 3. Virtual m achines in solution architecture 

Virtual Machine 

Hardware Configuration  

MicroStrategy Web/Mobile 
software 

 

Software configuration 

  Red Hat® Enterprise Linux® 6.3 

  MicroStrategy 9.3.0 

  Oracle® Java Development Kit (JDK) 1.6.0 R35 

  Apache Tomcat 7.0.30 

  Hardware configuration: 

  1 vCPU 

  4 GB memory 

  1 Ethernet card 

  40 GB x 1 storage 

  25GB VMDK only 

MicroStrategy Intelligence server 

 

Software configuration 

  Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6.3 

  MicroStrategy 9.3.0 

  Hardware configuration: 

  2 vCPUs 

  4 GB memory 

  1 Ethernet card 

  24 GB x 1 storage 

  25 GB VMDK only 

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 2 5   

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

Virtual Machine 

Hardware Configuration  

Database server  
(Microsoft SQL Server) 

 

Software configuration: 

  Microsoft SQL Server 2008 R2, Enterprise Edition  

Database server  
(Oracle Database) 

  Hardware configuration: 

  2 vCPUs 

  4 GB memory 

  1 Ethernet card 

  40 GB x 1 storage  

  40 GB VMDK only 

 

Software configuration: 

  Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6.3 

  Oracle Database 11g R2 

  Hardware configuration: 

  2 vCPUs 

  4 GB memory 

  1 Ethernet card 

  40 GB x 1 storage  

  25 GB VMDK only 

 

 

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 2 6   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

Resources 
For more information about VMware and MicroStrategy products and the storage platform that 
is discussed in this paper, view the links and references lists in the sections below.  

VMware vCenter Site Recovery Manager 

 

vCenter Site Recovery Manager: 
http://www.vmware.com/products/site-recovery-manager/  

  VMware vCenter Site Recovery Manager Documentation: 
http://www.vmware.com/support/pubs/srm_pubs.html 

  What’s New in VMware vCenter Site Recovery Manager 5.0: 

http://www.vmware.com/files/pdf/techpaper/Whats-New-VMware-vCenter-Site-Recovery-
Manager-50-Technical-Whitepaper.pdf  

vSphere Replication FAQ (2005776): 
http://kb.vmware.com/selfservice/microsites/search.do?language=en_US&cmd=displayKC&
externalId=2005776  

Site Recovery Manager Installation and Configuration:  
http://pubs.vmware.com/srm-51/topic/com.vmware.ICbase/PDF/srm-install-config-5-1.pdf   

Site Recovery Manager Administration Guide: 
http://www.vmware.com/pdf/srm-admin.pdf   

 

 

 

VMware References 

VMware vSphere 

  VMware vSphere Documentation: 

http://www.vmware.com/support/pubs/vsphere-esxi-vcenter-server-pubs.html  

  What’s New in VMware vSphere 5.1 – Performance: 

http://www.vmware.com/files/pdf/techpaper/Whats-New-VMware-vSphere-51-
Performance-Technical-Whitepaper.pdf  

  Performance Best Practices for VMware vSphere 5.1: 

http://www.vmware.com/pdf/Perf_Best_Practices_vSphere5.1.pdf   

 

Featured VMware Documentation Sets: 
http://www.vmware.com/support/pubs/  

  VMware Licensing Help Center: 

http://www.vmware.com/support/licensing/ 

VMware Community and TV  

  VMware Community, VMware Technology Network (VMTN): 

https://communities.vmware.com/community/vmtn    

  VMware Best Practices (see VIOPS links): 

https://communities.vmware.com/community/vmtn/bestpractices   

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 2 7   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

  VMware Community, VMware Knowledge Base: 

http://communities.vmware.com/community/vmtn/resources/knowledgebase   

  VMware Support Insider: 

http://blogs.vmware.com/kb/   

  VMware TV: 

http://www.youtube.com/user/vmwaretv   

  VMworld TV: 

http://www.youtube.com/user/VMworldTV   

  VMware KBTV (external): 

http://www.youtube.com/user/VMwareKB  

MicroStrategy 

  MicroStrategy Home Site: 

http://www.microstrategy.com/  

  MicroStrategy Analytics Platform: 

http://www.microstrategy.com/platforms/analytics  

  The New MicroStrategy Analytics Platform Is Truly a “Game Changer”: 

http://www.microstrategy.com/blog/october-2013/the-new-microstrategy-analytics-
platform-is-truly-a-game-changer”    

Storage Platforms 

  VMware vCenter Site Recovery Manager Storage Partner Compatibility MatrixSRAs for SRM 

5.xSRAs for SRM 4.x: 
http://www.vmware.com/support/srm/srm-storage-partners.html 

 

Setting up VMware vCenter Site Recovery Manager with Partner Storage Arrays (1014610): 
http://kb.vmware.com/selfservice/microsites/search.do?language=en_US&cmd=displayKC&
externalId=1014610   

  VMware Compatibility Guide (for a complete list of compatible storage devices): 

http://www.vmware.com/pdf/vi35_san_guide.pdf  

 

 

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 2 8   

 

Testing MicroStrategy with VMware vCenter™ SRM 5.1,  and vSphere™ vMotion and HA 

Acknowledgements 
The following individuals contributed to the creation of this paper: 

  Balayya Kamanboina, ISV Validation Engineer, VMware 

  Brian Kane, Principal Systems Engineer, MicroStrategy 

 

Jon Catanzano, Technical Writer, Consultant 

 

 

D E PL O YM EN T   AN D   T EC H N I C AL   C O N S I D ER AT I O N S   G U I D E   / 2 9   

