fpo image

• HIGHER utilization of  

compute, network, and  
storage resources

• LOWER capital and  

operational costs

• BETTER application  

scalability and agility with 
automated provisioning and 
centralized management 

MIXED APPLICATION WORKLOADS  
ON VBLOCK SYSTEMS

Standardizing the infrastructure improves resource 
utilization, staff productivity, IT agility, and TCO. 

Over time, the practice of building out separate infrastructures for mission critical 
applications has increased complexity and led to the under utilization of resources 
in one environment while other environments were strained. IT organizations are 
addressing this by standardizing their infrastructure. Many want to run mixed 
workloads on larger systems in order to:

•  Improve overall utilization

•  Reduce footprint 

•  Optimize stafﬁng resources

•  Leverage common data protection strategies

•  Reduce TCO

Organizations running mixed application workloads enjoy signiﬁcant cost beneﬁts 
and improve IT agility. Utilization of server resources is much higher. Application 
deployment and maintenance can be simpliﬁed and standardized. Memory and  
cache allocation can be more dynamic. And capital and operational costs can be 
reduced dramatically.

Vblock™ Systems are an ideal foundation for mixed workload environments. Strict 
design control enables Vblock systems to meet speciﬁc performance and availability 
levels while tiered service proﬁles enable IT to allocate resources as needed to each 
application. Fully Automated Storage Tiering (FAST) ensures that applications are 
using the best storage type for their needs, resulting in better insulation between 
workloads and optimal performance across all workloads. VCE has validated data 
protection solutions that reduce storage footprint and offer a range of disaster 
tolerance solutions. 

www.vce.com

www.vce.com

THE WORLD’S MOST ADVANCED CONVERGED INFRASTRUCTURE

•  EMC Avamar data protection and 

Avamar with EMC Data Domain 
are supported on Vblock Systems. 
Avamar is extremely effective at 
delivering backups in less time, using 
fewer network resources and fewer 
virtual server resources than other 
options. When used along with Data 
Domain deduplication software, 
Avamar helps reduce network trafﬁc 
and storage archive footprint.

•  EMC VPLEX is an innovative workload 

mobility and business continuity 
solution that enables IT to easily 
move business applications within or 
between Vblock systems located in 
the same data center or metro area. 
VPLEX can also mirror business-
critical data to approach zero data 
loss and automatically provide near-
zero application recovery.

Choosing the Right Vblock 
System for Your Mixed Workloads 
•  Vblock™ Series 300 is an agile and 

efﬁcient data center-class system 
that features modular, scalable 
performance. It has a high-density, 
compact fabric switch; integrated 
fabric-based blade servers; and  
best-in-class uniﬁed storage. 
Simpliﬁed provisioning allows IT 
professionals to marshal resources 
quickly and efﬁciently. 

•  Vblock™ Series 700 is an enterprise-
class, mission-critical system for the 
world’s most demanding workloads 
and service levels. It features the best 
director-class fabric switch, most 
advanced fabric-based blade server, 
and most trusted storage platform.

Why Vblock Systems are Ideal  
for Mixed Workloads
Vblock Systems from VCE provide 
an enterprise-class converged and 
virtualized infrastructure comprised  
of industry-leading network, storage, 
and virtualization technology. VCE 
performs the physical and logical  
build in-factory to ensure component 
feature interoperability and speed 
time to deployment. Resources are 
provisioned as a single infrastructure  
to simplify operations and improve  
staff productivity. 

Deploying upgrades and patches 
typically drains IT resources and ties up 
test environments. With Vblock Systems, 
the picture changes signiﬁcantly. VCE 
makes validated and fully regressed 
software releases and ﬁrmware  
upgrades that cover the entire system 
available on formal release schedules. 
This dramatically reduces IT risk. 

Vblock Systems scale to meet  
changing business requirements.  
The system is designed to maintain 
balanced performance at scale so 
that IT can maintain SLAs even as 
conﬁgurations change. 

VCE validates and supports data 
protection products that both ensure 
uptime and reduce storage footprint:

•  EMC RecoverPoint uses a single 
management interface, provides 
protection for data and applications, 
and supports multiple physical and 
virtual servers and storage arrays. 
RecoverPoint on Vblock Systems 
provides continuous application  
data protection, data replication 
between EMC and non-EMC arrays, 
local and remote data replication, 
and data recovery on the same or 
different hosts.

 

www.vce.com

When the company was acquired, IT 
was in a strong position to inﬂuence 
the new parent organization. Realizing 
that its newly acquired division had 
experienced so much success with 
Vblock systems, the parent company 
installed two Vblock Series 700 systems 
to virtualize its global operations 
centers and has begun planning for a 
rollout of Vblock systems to over 30 
manufacturing sites and regional sales 
and marketing ofﬁces worldwide.

Service Provider

It was becoming increasingly challenging 
for one major service provider to 
support its hyper-growth curve with an 
inadequate and aging IT infrastructure. 
In its North American data center, some 
assets were underutilized, while others 
were overused — and data center space 
and power were at capacity. In August 
of 2011, the company deployed its ﬁrst 
Vblock system to support Latin American 
operations. In early 2012, the company 
replaced its North American data 
center with a new facility — powered 
by another Vblock Series 300 system. 
As a result, the service provider has 
reduced provisioning times, decreasing 
time to build internal IT environments or 
to deliver new customer services from 
30–90 days to 3–5 days. 

HealthCare

A multi-state managed healthcare 
organization is using Vblock Systems  
to provide Government health programs 
with extremely high application 
availability and performance. The 
organization consolidated its 
infrastructure on Vblock systems, 
realizing a 4:1 consolidation ratio 
and a 25-40 percent application 
and storage performance boost. 
They are running electronic medical 
records (EMR), J.D. Edwards ﬁnancials 
and human resources, TriZetto 
claims administration, among other 
applications as well as departmental-
based applications and ﬁle shares.

For additional protection, IT is 
deploying EMC RecoverPoint remote 
data protection to replicate its Vblock 
systems located at data centers 
400 miles apart. EMC Data Domain 
deduplication storage systems for 
backup and recovery also are integrated 
with the Vblock systems to reduce 
network trafﬁc and storage footprint. 
With the new solution, IT is able more 
rapidly provision its infrastructure to 
stay ahead of growing demand while 
easily meeting the states’ SLAs for top 
performance, availability and scalability.

VCE application experts (SAP, Oracle, 
Microsoft, etc.) work with the client 
to correctly size the Vblock system to 
support a mixed workload environment. 
VCE vArchitects work with the client 
to collect information on workload 
characteristics to determine the storage, 
compute, and network requirements 
for each application. Analysis of 
this data enables VCE engineers to 
design the physical and logical build 
that will yield the needed scale and 
performance characteristics for each 
application to perform optimally in a 
production environment. This design 
work incorporates the expertise of 
VCE application specialists along with 
industry supported design calculation 
toolsets, yielding a design that is 
balanced in resource utilization  
while allowing the needed ﬂexibility  
to allow future scaling of the  
converged infrastructure.

Mixed Workload  
Customer Success Stories  
on Vblock Systems
Pharmaceutical 

A major pharmaceutical company 
had nearly outgrown its data center. 
Operations and support costs were 
soaring as the IT infrastructure grew in 
size and complexity. The ﬁrm needed 
a way to better manage its costs 
without impeding business and IT 
growth. By standardizing on Vblock 
Systems running multiple applications, 
IT gained a 50% increase in data center 
capacity without expanding its original 
footprint. Standardization on pre-
integrated platforms with simpliﬁed 
provisioning made it possible for IT to 
increase its virtual environment without 
concomitant increases in staff resources. 

 
Copyright © 2012 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, LLC. and/or its  
afﬁliates in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

FOR MORE INFORMATION, VISIT US AT www.vce.com

