De-risking the Private Cloud 
Information Brief 

 

Private Cloud Performance and Availability 
Management 

What is unique about a private or internal cloud infrastructure that increases risk? 

Compared with a ‘traditional’ data center, cloud environments frequently have more users, more 
applications, more data, and typically, a tighter set of operating standards to meet. But thanks to 
virtualized servers, storage and networking, they’re usually running this increased level of activity on 
less hardware, which leads to lower overall cost.  Unfortunately, one of the attributes of private clouds 
is the streamlined provisioning that can lead to unpredictable workloads, which negatively impacts 
performance.  

The abstraction layers make it more difficult to address performance problems and troubleshoot root 
causes to find issues that can bring applications down. Additionally, the density increases the impact 
of a failure, as more users and applications are affected by these performance problems and 
downtime. 

Typically, when an issue is reported, the user doesn’t know where the problem is, it could be in the 
network, in the storage infrastructure or in the server hosting the virtual machine that’s running their 
application. In the less virtualized physical environment, typically connected to FC SANs, the system 
administrator may know the cause of the problem or at least where to look. Thanks to the abstraction 
of the cloud environment, they are unsure where to begin.  

What is the effect of this increased risk? 

Like the life cycle of applications being deployed on virtual servers, the first applications being 
deployed in the private cloud tend to be tier 2 or less business-critical.  Even when tier 1 applications 
are deployed, IT operations typically over-provision hardware and staff resources, in an effort to 
ensure adequate performance and availability. 

 

 

Summary:  

•  Compared with a 
‘traditional’ data 
center, cloud 
environments 
frequently have 
more users, more 
applications, more 
data, and typically, 
a tighter set of 
operating 
standards to meet 

• 

 

The most 
successful cloud 
implementations 
include a layer of 
management to 
handle change, 
capacity, and 
performance 
management  

•  Because of the 

dynamic workload 
nature of private 
clouds, 
performance 
management can 
have the greatest 
effect on 
maintaining service 
level agreements  

•  Most monitoring 

solutions don’t 
provide a 
comprehensive, 
real-time, cross 
domain view of the 
environment, 
leading to 
ineffective 
troubleshooting  

Virtual Instruments 
provides the ideal 
performance and 
availability 
optimization 
solution for mission 
critical applications 

• 

 

VirtualInstruments.com 

 

What are key attributes of a successful private cloud deployment? 

In the diagram below, we outline the fundamental attributes of a private cloud in the ‘fundamentals’ 
tier.  Nearly all deployments have some level of server virtualization, though technically it’s not a 
requirement.  And most do some level of self-service provisioning, though the actual physical steps 
may include a manual process involving traditional provisioning steps.  The most successful cloud 
implementations add a layer of management to handle change, capacity, and performance 
management, the ‘OPEX CAPEX’ tier.  With those layers optimized, companies can mitigate the 
tendency to over-provision, and see real improvements in OPEX and CAPEX.  Because of the dynamic 
workload nature of private clouds, performance management can have the greatest effect on 
maintaining service level SLAs.  Capacity and change management are important, but less so because 
the rate of change of the infrastructure itself is far less than the dynamic nature of users’ interaction 
with applications.  

Going forward, the ‘next steps’ are to more fully automate the management of the infrastructure, to 
seamlessly integrate with public clouds, and to provide federated access to users.  But successful 
private cloud infrastructures are being built today with those steps still out in the future. 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

                              Private Cloud Computing Deployment Stack 

What are some of the typical solutions to this challenge?  

 

There are tools available from most of the device manufacturers, like SRM software from the array 
vendor, fabric monitoring programs for the switches and HBAs, and virtual server monitors from 
literally dozens of vendors. But these ‘element’ tools require that you know the general location of the 
problem, which is often not the case. These tools also don’t provide a comprehensive, real-time, cross 
domain view of the environment, and troubleshooting with them can be ineffective, like hearing only 
half of a phone conversation. The result can be extended periods of trial and error, hunting for the root 
cause, or creating routines to track specific links and waiting for the problem to reoccur. In a 
business-critical cloud environment, where more data is at risk and more users can be affected, this 
may not be good enough. 

What are the key attributes of performance management for private clouds? 

Ideally, the solution should be agentless and easy to deploy, completely non-intrusive to the 
existing infrastructure components, and it should present a simple GUI for quick analysis and 
use by general administrators. 

If the solution is vendor independent, it’s much easier to support a heterogeneous cloud, you 
avoid vendor lock-in, and you reduce the number of tools you need to deploy and support.  

• 

• 

2 
 

 

• 

It should support a cross-domain scope, meaning that it should monitor as much of the data 
path as possible - from the server to the switches to the storage arrays. 

•  A true real-time solution with millisecond granularity will offer a troubleshooting approach that 

ensures even hard to find, intermittent problems are quickly discovered and remediated. 
•  Proactive alerts allow for quick problem identification, and predictive metrics help avoid 

problems from affecting applications. 

• 

• 

The best solutions scale to the world’s largest enterprises to tens of petabytes, tens of 
thousands of servers and thousands of switch ports, ensuring that no matter how large the 
application gets, you won’t outgrow your performance optimization platform. 

Lastly and perhaps most importantly, you must monitor and analyze performance from the 
point of view of the application.  It does no good to know that you’re pushing thousands of 
IOPS through a pipe if you can’t determine how that flow is affecting application response 
time latency. 

Conclusion 

Private cloud computing, while offering advantages in reduced IT OPEX and CAPEX and in flexibility 
and speed of application deployments, brings additional risks to performance and availability. 

Virtual Instruments can provide the ideal performance and availability optimization solution for your 
virtualized mission-critical applications, whether they run on purely physical, or on the most advanced 
private cloud infrastructures. We call the solution ‘Virtual Infrastructure Optimization’. Virtual 
Infrastructure Optimization holistically assesses the entire private cloud infrastructure, and provides 
the administrator with the real-time and historical data necessary to make intelligent decisions about 
I/O capacity, utilization, and performance for every layer of the infrastructure - network, server, 
storage, and applications. 

Other solutions in this area peer into single dimensions of the infrastructure, and while these solutions 
have a place in routine planning, they do not address the critical dynamic cloud computing 
infrastructure management needs: real-time data about what is happening in the moment.  Virtual 
Instruments’ VirtualWisdom provides the real-time granular monitoring and analysis necessary to 
mitigate the risk of deploying tier 1 applications on private clouds. 

 For more information on how VirtualWisdom supports private cloud computing, please go to:  
http://www.virtualinstruments.com//cloud 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Corporate Headquarters 
25 Metro Drive Suite 400 
San Jose, CA 95110 
Phone:  408-579-4000 
Fax:  408-579-4001 

 

Sales 
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Phone:  408-579-4081 

Support 
support@virtualinstruments.com 
 

©2011 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are 
trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or servicemarks 
of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 09/11 

3 
 

