HOW MUCH REVENUE DOES IT GENERATE?

Finding the Root Cause of 
Application Performance Issues  
in Production

The most enjoyable part of my job at AppDynamics  
is to witness and evangelize customer success.  
What’s slightly strange is that for this to happen,  
an application has to slow down or crash.

An AppDynamics Business White Paper“If we’ve sold less than 
$1,000 in five minutes, 
there is probably a 
problem, even if it’s  
2 o’clock in the morning.  
If our sales have flatlined, 
that’s a critical problem. 
I don’t know how to be 
any clearer.”

Geover, Manager of Quality 
Engineering at Orbitz Worldwide

It’s a bittersweet feeling when End Users, Operations, Developers and many 
Businesses suffer application performance pain. Outages cost the business money, 
but sometimes they cost people their jobs--which is truly unfortunate. However, 
when people solve performance issues, they become overnight heroes with a great 
sense of achievement, pride, and obviously relief.

To explain the complexity of managing application performance, imagine your 
application is 100 haystacks that represent tiers, and somewhere a needle is 
hurting your end user experience. It’s your job to find the needle as quickly as 
possible! The problem is, each haystack has over half a million pieces of hay, and 
they each represent lines of code in your application. It’s therefore no surprise that 
organizations can take days or weeks to find the root cause of performance issues 
in large, complex, distributed production environments.

End User Experience Monitoring, Application Mapping and Transaction profiling 
will help you identify unhappy users, slow business transactions, and problematic 
haystacks (tiers) in your application, but they won’t find needles. To do this, you’ll 
need x-ray visibility inside haystacks to see which pieces of hay (lines of code) are 
holding the needle (root cause) that is hurting your end users. This X-Ray visibility is 
known as “Deep Diagnostics” in application monitoring terms, and it represents the 
difference between isolating performance issues and resolving them.

For example, AppDynamics has great End User Monitoring, Business Transaction 
Monitoring, Application Flow Maps and very cool analytics all integrated into a 
single product. They all look and sound great (honestly they do), but they only 
identify and isolate performance issues to an application tier. This is largely what 
Business Transaction Management (BTM) and Network Performance Management 
(NPM) solutions do today. They’ll tell you what and where a business transaction 
slows down, but they won’t tell you the root cause so you can resolve the issues.

2

Finding the Root Cause of Application PerformanceIssues in ProductionWhy Deep Diagnostics for Production Monitoring Matters
A key reason why AppDynamics has become very successful in just a few years 
is because our Deep Diagnostics, behavioral learning, and analytics technology is 
18 months ahead of the nearest vendor. A bold claim? Perhaps, but it’s backed up 
by bold customer case studies such as Edmunds.com and Karavel, who compared 
us against some of the top vendors in the application performance management 
(APM) market in 2011. Yes, End User Monitoring, Application Mapping and 
Transaction Profiling are important--but these capabilities will only help you isolate 
performance pain, not resolve it.

AppDynamics has the ability to instantly show the complete code execution 
and timing of slow user requests or business transactions for any Java or .NET 
application, in production, with incredibly small overhead and no configuration. 
We basically give customers a metal detector and X-Ray vision to help them find 
needles in haystacks. Locating the exact line of code responsible for a performance 
issue means Operations and Developers solve business pain faster, and this is a key 
reason why AppDynamics technology is disrupting the market.

Below is a small collection of needles that customers found using AppDynamics 
in production. The simple fact is that complete code visibility allows customers to 
troubleshoot in minutes as opposed to days and weeks. Monitoring with blind spots 
and configuring instrumentation are a thing of the past with AppDynamics.

Needle #1 - Slow SQL Statement
Industry: Education
Pain: Key Business Transaction with 5 sec response times
Root Cause: Slow JDBC query with full-table scan

3

Finding the Root Cause of Application PerformanceIssues in ProductionNeedle #2 - Slice of Death in Cassandra
Industry: SaaS Provider
Pain: Key Business Transaction with 2.5 sec response times
Root Cause: Slow Thrift query in Cassandra

Needle #3 - Slow & Chatty Web Service Calls
Industry: Media
Pain: Several Business Transactions with 2.5 min response times
Root Cause: Excessive Web Service Invocation (5+ per trx)

4

Finding the Root Cause of Application PerformanceIssues in ProductionNeedle #4 - Extreme XML processing
Industry:Retail/E-Commerce
Pain: Key Business Transaction with 17 sec response times
Root Cause: XML serialization over the wire.

Needle #5 - Mail Server Connectivity
Industry: Retail/E-Commerce
Pain: Key Business Transaction with 20 sec response times
Root Cause: Slow Mail Server Connectivity

5

Finding the Root Cause of Application PerformanceIssues in ProductionNeedle #6 - Slow Result Set Iteration
Industry: Retail/E-Commerce
Pain: Several Business Transactions with 30+ sec response times
Root Cause: Querying too much data

Needle #7 - Slow Security 3rd Party Framework
Industry: Education
Pain: All Business Transactions with > 3 sec response times
Root Cause: Slow 3rd party code

6

Finding the Root Cause of Application PerformanceIssues in ProductionNeedle #8 - Excessive SQL Queries
Industry: Education
Pain: Key Business Transactions with 2 min response times
Root Cause: Thousands of SQL queries per transaction

Needle #9 - Commit Happy
Industry: Retail/E-Commerce
Pain: Several Business Transactions with 25+ sec response times
Root Cause: Unnecessary use of commits and transaction management.

7

Finding the Root Cause of Application PerformanceIssues in ProductionNeedle #10 - Locking under Concurrency
Industry: Retail/E-Commerce
Pain: Several Business Transactions with 5+ sec response times
Root Cause: Non-Thread safe cache forces locking for read/write consistency

Needle #11 - Slow 3rd Party Search Service
Industry: SaaS Provider
Pain: Key Business Transaction with 2+ min response times
Root Cause: Slow 3rd Party code

8

Finding the Root Cause of Application PerformanceIssues in ProductionNeedle #12 - Slow 3rd Party Search Service
Industry: SaaS Provider
Pain: Key Business Transaction with 2+ min response times
Root Cause: Slow 3rd Party code

Needle #13 - Slow 3rd Party Search Service
Industry: SaaS Provider
Pain: Key Business Transaction with 2+ min response times
Root Cause: Slow 3rd Party code

Try it FREE at  

www.appdynamics.com

AppDynamics, Inc. 
www.appdynamics.com

Copyright © 2014 AppDynamics, Inc. All rights reserved. The term 
APPDYNAMICS and any logos of AppDynamics are trademarked or 
registered trademarks of AppDynamics, Inc.

