SAP AND VCE: PERFECT PARTNERS 
FOR TRANSFORMING YOUR BUSINESS
FAST. PREDICTABLE. EFFICIENT.

SAP and SAP HANA boost your business efficiencies and make your data a source of 
strategic advantage. Paired with VCE™ Vblock™ Systems, your IT operations become 
even more efficient and powerful. 

VCE, the market leader* in integrated infrastructure systems, provides:

• Enhanced performance throughout the enterprise

• Reduced Total Cost of Ownership

• Improved application availability

• Streamlined deployment and operations

Vblock Systems are ready to work when you are. Seamlessly combining the               
best-in-class compute, network and storage technologies from VMware, Cisco      
and EMC, Vblock Systems are pre-integrated, tested and validated. They are ideally 
suited for moving SAP and SAP HANA to a virtual environment. 

And with scalability, mobility and integrated data protection solutions,   
Vblock Systems provide a future-proof path for adding SAP applications.

• DRIVE BUSINESS
  INNOVATION  
  Discover new growth
  opportunities. Rethink
  business processes. Tap  
  into new revenue streams. 

• RUN YOUR BUSINESS AT
  MARKET SPEED 
  Use live data to do real
  time planning, execution,
  reporting and analytics.

• SIMPLIFY BUSINESS
  INTERACTIONS  
  Empower people to decide
  and act. Provide business
  insights on any device,
  anytime, anywhere.

1 Ranked No. 1 by both Gartner and 451 Group

www.vce.com

THE WORLD’S MOST ADVANCED CONVERGED INFRASTRUCTURE

Benefits of VCE Solutions for SAP  
VCE Vblock Systems have revolutionized the IT infrastructure. 
By consolidating all the components into a single system, 
Vblock Systems improve efficiency, speed, and reliability —  
all while driving down costs. Sprawling, complex hardware is 
replaced by a smaller footprint x86-based Vblock System.

With Vblock Systems IT staff no longer needs to spend an 
average of 70% of their time maintaining infrastructure, they 
can focus on activities that add real value to the business.

Finally, business continuity is a key requirement for companies 
whose success rely on robust operations. VCE solutions enable 
high availability and rapid recovery, ensuring mission-critical 
applications are there when you need them.

Vblock System Benefits 
• Simplified Provisioning: Service profile templates and an   
  automation engine designed specifically for Vblock Systems  
  make this a simpler process.

• Self-Service, Web-Based Tools for SAP Developers  
  and Testers: Catalogs and orchestration tools certified for  
  Vblock Systems are available, including VMware vCloud  
  Director (vCD), SAP NetWeaver Landscape Virtualization  
  Management (LVM) and Cisco Intelligent Automation 
  for Cloud (CIAC). Each allows developers and testers to hide  
  the complexity of provisioning processes from end-users.

 

• The Vblock System Solution for SAP Application Server  
  Elasticity enables IT organizations to better manage  
  and allocate their converged compute, network and  
  storage resources. 

• The Vblock System Solution for SAP Mobility enables IT  
  organizations and service providers to migrate SAP  
  applications and resources between Vblock Systems, both  
  locally and in geographically separated data centers.  
  Migrations are automated, transparent and non-disruptive.

Rely on a Platform Optimized for   
SAP® HANA Performance   
VCE brings together all of the necessary components for SAP 
HANA® into a single, standardized converged infrastructure  
system to ensure maximum performance at scale, even with 
high data volumes. This allows organizations to deploy SAP 
HANA into production with trusted and predictable  
performance, one-stop customer support, security and  
pain-free deployment.

• VblockTM Specialized System for SAP HANA® delivers faster  
  time to value and the highest levels of availability and  
  application performance. Incorporating best-of-breed  
  compute, network and storage components from Cisco and  
  EMC, this Vblock Specialized System is optimized for SAP  
  HANA software and certified by SAP.. To further reduce costs,  
  VCE undertakes comprehensive system testing to guarantee  
  interoperability and optimize performance. 

Customer Success 
Leading organizations that rely on their IT operations for  
success have achieved remarkable results by pairing their  
SAP applications with Vblock Systems:

• A multinational oil conglomerate that had acquired several  
  companies needed to consolidate its global IT operations.  
  The existing IT infrastructure was both inadequate for its  
  needs and expensive to operate. It chose Vblock Systems  
  as part of a move to a private cloud network, rolling out an  
  SAP application at the same time. In just 12 months, it  
  replaced 675 physical servers with 63 servers running 480  
  virtual machines. The change enabled faster application  
  provisioning, improved service levels and increased IT asset  
  utilization. On the cost side, the switch produced a 64%  
  internal rate of return (IRR) from savings on energy  
  consumption and maintenance. 

• A major railway operator faced economic pressures due to  
  changing markets and sought to both reduce costs and  
  improve its capabilities in those segments of greatest revenue  
  potential. It moved its inefficient outsourced IT operations  
  in-house, switching from a mainframe system to a private  
  cloud. Its existing, business-critical SAP applications were all  
  virtualized, without a minute of downtime since the system’s  
  deployment. “We were looking for significant operational and  
  cost efficiencies,” said the CIO. “I’m pleased to say we’ve  
  achieved both.”

• An aerospace company with 600 mission-critical SAP  
  enterprise applications was using manual processes to back  
  up data onto tape, then driving the tapes to a disaster- 
  recovery site in another state. Compute and virtualized  
  resources could not be backed up. The company used a  
  Vblock System to back up data and compute. The  
  organization’s recovery time objective is expected to drop  
  from four days to 30-90 minutes. Meanwhile, its recovery  
  point objective will be reduced from hours to milliseconds  
  due to the asynchronous replication capability provided by  
  EMC Recover Point software. 

1 Vblock System 720 is estimated to be capable of hosting 13.03 million SAPS.

www.vce.com

Table 1: Business Value: Before and After Vblock System Implementation

Benefit 

Vblock Systems Impact

Result

AGILITY: Time to deploy  
new infrastructure

Staff time to configure/test/deploy 
new infrastructure

Avoided logical build, configuration, 
cabling, and integration tasks normally 
associated with separate infrastructure 
elements

* Reduced calendar time for deployment   
  from 160 days to 40 days

* Reduced staff time to  
  configure/test/deploy by 79%

END-USER PRODUCTIVITY:  
Reduction in user inactivity due 
to system/application outage and 
unavailability

Improvement in system performance 
driving end-user productivity increases

IT STAFF PRODUCTIVITY:  
Reduction in IT staff time to manage 
and implement all aspects of 
datacenter operations

Reduced downtime

Improve throughput

* Reduced server downtime by 96% from  
  10.7 to 0.4 hours per year

* Improved user productivity by $42,000  
  per 100 users per year

Reduced time to configure/test/deploy; 
simpler, one-source problem resolution for 
entire stack

* Reduced IT staff costs by 38%, saving  
  close to $7,300 per 100 users

IT INFRASTRUCTURE COSTS:  
Reduction in acquisition/maintenance 
expenditures on hardware (servers, 
storage, network, etc.) and software

Higher utilization of storage, server, and 
network resources; consolidated footprint; 
lower power usage

Reduced costs for:
• Storage by 50%
• Network hardware by 40% 
• Servers by 66%
• Power by 16%
• Facilities space by 12%

Source: September 2013 report released by IDC “Convergence with Vblock Systems: a Value Measurement”

• A major apparel manufacturer with global operations chose a  
  variety of SAP applications. To avoid the complexity of a  
  multivendor server, storage and network environment—and  
  to ensure scalability to meet future business requirements— 
  the company chose Vblock Systems. One was configured  
  with flash drives to support maximum I/O performance.  
  A second was configured for storage capabilities for failover,  
  development and quality assurance. “The integration of  
  compute, network and storage into a single stack is  
  transforming the way we as IT professionals view our SAP 
  landscape,” said the CIO, who reports significant new  
  efficiencies and operational cost savings. 

VCE Professional Services: The Right Way to  
Get Started VCE provides a complete service package to 
migrate HP-UX/Itanium and Solaris/SPARC-based data onto 
Vblock Systems. Flexible workshop formats and migration-
acceleration services produce a detailed migration plan that 
addresses application dependencies, service level agreements 
and operational requirements. 

VCE has selected best-in-class partners to deliver a  
cost-effective and high-quality migration-factory approach  
to accelerate SAP Landscape migrations. VCE’s migration  
methodology proactively addresses risks to ensure SLAs  
are maintained during migration. 

Learn more about how VCE can help you migrate from  
your current HP-UX/Itanium and Solaris/SPARC  
environment and achieve the high availability and scale  
your applications require. 

Visit vce.com or contact a Vblock Qualified Partner. 

Copyright © 2013 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock, VCE Vision and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, LLC.  
and/or its affiliates in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

FOR MORE INFORMATION, VISIT US AT www.vce.com

