Secure Printing with VMware View 

KEY BENEFITS

•  Leverage the same single sign-on 

process for desktop access and print 
job release 

•  Allow direct management of print jobs 

from any virtual desktop

•  Enable a seamless generic printing 
release process for mobile roaming 
devices, e.g. tablets, medical carts, and 
laptops

•  Simplify management processes with 

integrated reporting and auditing 

•  Reduce unnecessary CAPEX and OPEX 

spending for acquiring newer MFP 
printers—compatible with legacy and/
or MFP printers 

•  Ensure compliance with personal 
information mandates (e.g. HIPPA, 
PCI, SOX, etc.)

SOLUTION COMPONENTS

VMware® ESXi™ or vSphere™ 5

VMware vCenter™ Server 5.0

VMware View™ 4.x or above

Print Release Partner Solution  

Print Server enabled on Microsoft 
Windows Server 2003/2008/2008R2

Network-Based Printer(Legacy or MFP) 

125Khz Proximity Card Reader

Mifare, Casi-Rusco, ISO/IEC 14443 
Proximity Card 

Virtual Desktop Mobility Printing with Security   
Traditional “walled garden” ! rewalls or security perimeters centralize corporate data and 
help control user access, but they do not secure the printing process. The risks and 
consequences of an unsecured printing environment can result in leaks of corporate or 
government data. Violating compliance mandates (HIPAA, PCI, SOX, etc.) on personal 
information is another serious risk. 

Every day, employees send business-critical information to networked printers away from 
their workstations—but there is no way to physically ensure that the correct person picks 
up a speci! c print job. It’s critical for security and management to be able to audit what’s 
been printed by whom and when at which location.  

Employees at a company with a virtual desktop environment can access their data from 
anywhere within the network or over a trusted VPN, and send it to a networked printer. 

In the location-aware mobile computing environment, virtual desktop secure printing is 
becoming a requirement. 

Secure Print Release enables any VMware View user to securely print their documents with 
an easy tap-and-print process for either legacy or modern MFP printers. 

The VMware View user will be able to send their print job to any networked printer and 
then retrieve their document on demand, all from the virtual desktop. By leveraging 
existing VMware View technology, the end user can access their virtual desktop on multiple 
devices: thin clients, tablets, notebooks, mobile phones, or mobility carts—and take 
advantage of secure printing. 

Business Process Challenges
•  Allow on-demand reporting and compliance auditing on who prints what job at what time 

at which location 

•  Print delegation for releasing the job to other authorized sta"  to be able to print

•  Eliminate inconvenient queued print jobs for on-the-# y document printing to any 

networked printers

Secure Print Release Solution
The ! rst step in implementing Secure Print Release is to acquire the Secure Print Server 
solution from a printing partner. The Secure Print Control software will be installed on the 
same machine as your existing Print Server. 

The Secure Print Control software can use Active Directory for authentication or will 
integrate with an existing single sign-on solution. The Secure Print Control vendor solutions 
have modular SSO architecture and can work with you to integrate any existing SSO 
solution in your current infrastructure. Companies that do not want to use Active Directory 
or that have an existing SSO solution can alternatively use local lists or user input to a SQL 
database. The single sign-on and user login data are aggregated for compliance auditing 
purposes. 

To modify your printers to work with Secure Print Control, you need to update the ! rmware 
on your MFP printers to include the Secure Print Control Client Application, and attach a 
USB proximity card reader. For Legacy printers that are not MFP, you need to install and 

S O L U T I O N   B R I E F   /   1

Secure Printing with VMware View 

con! gure a network-based proximity card reader. In addition to this, you would connect a thin client next to the Legacy 
printer, or require the VMware View user to use their mobile device to access the Secure Print Client application. 

The diagram below shows how the Secure Print Release solution ! ts in with your existing infrastructure. 

Virtual Desktop

Virtual Desktop Server

Single Sign-On
(SSO) Server

Active Directory

OR

Mobile Devices 

Remote Application 

Server

Secure Print Control

Figure 2: Secure Print Release Solution Network Architecture

Result
Implementation of a Secure Print Release solution will allow your organization to:

•  Give job release control to the user and eliminate unclaimed print output waste 

•  Change the printer queue to follow the user instead of following the printe

 

Figure 1: VMware View User Print Release Flow

Summary

S O L U T I O N   B R I E F   /   2

Secure Printing with VMware View 

The common printing solution is either having the proximity card reader attached to a thin client printing station 
to identify the location or connecting the proximity card reader to the printer and associate its location within 
corporate directory. Either approach has its pros and cons on maintenance and cost. Secure printing solution in 
the virtual desktop environment help associate the printing authorization and tracking along with the virtual 
desktop logon activities, you will be able to easily allow users to securely queue documents sent from any virtual 
desktop, to be released and printed to any networked printers within their organization.  

Solution Partners 

Name

Plus Technologies

Jetmobile

 

Bill of Material

URL

Secure Print Release 
Software

SecureJet

http://www.plustechnologies.com/
PrintSolutions/SecurePrintingSolutions.
aspx
https://www.jetmobile.com/SecureJet_
enterprise_online_demo

Authors 
The solution management team with VMware’s End-User Computing business unit built the solution 
infrastructure, validated the design, and produced this solution brief. Please note the solution is NOT exclusive 
with partners below. Consult with your print service provider for better business decision making. 

About Plus Technologies
Plus Technologies has been developing and providing quality software and service solutions targeted to the 
enterprise print market since 1994. Our solutions help customers:

•  Improve IT and help desk productivity

•  Improve compliance/security

•  Reduce printing costs

•  Avoid unnecessary printing

•  Add print routing/delegation capabilities

•  Provide pro-active break/! x noti! cation

•  Increase print throughput and scalability

•  Track user and device print metrics

About Jetmobile 
Jetmobile, an ISO 9001:2008 certi! ed company, invents, develops and provides since 1994 a range of innovative 
printing solutions that generate savings for your company on a daily basis.

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com
Copyright © 2012 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at
http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be 
trademarks of their respective companies. Item No: VMW-SB-SECUREPRINTING-USLET-02120217-WEB

