Solution Brief
Secure and Simple 
Virtual Desktop Access 

AT A GL ANCE

The complexity and number of logins employees 
must manage daily are increasing, resulting in 
frustration and lost productivity. In most 
organizations, employees are required to 
remember up to 20 passwords that need to be 
changed  every 30 days based on password 
security policies. The time wasted entering, 
changing, writing down, forgetting and 
resetting passwords represents a significant 
loss in productivity and a significant cost to 
IT help-desk operations.

VMware View & IBM 
Security Access Manager 
for Enterprise Single 
Sign-On 
Key Benefits
•  Lower Administrative Costs. Cut desktop administrative 

costs by up to 50% through centralized management. 

•  User Productivity. More than 85% reduction in time 

to information.

•  Security. Improved identity assurance and 100% graceful 

sign-off.

•  Compliance reporting. More than 75% reduction in 

fine-grained audit tracking costs.

•  Helpdesk cost reduction. 35-45% reduction in IT 

helpdesk costs.

•  Leverage the best from VMware and IBM. Long-term 

partnership and dedicated expertise to address 
customer needs. 

Industry Challenges
Analysts estimate that the desktop virtualization market will 
grow to over $1 billion by 2015. While this solution simplifies the 
organization’s desktop implementation management 
processes and lowers the TCO of desktops in general, it does 
little to address the challenges and costs associated with 
managing the identities of users accessing the applications 
inside the virtual desktop. Also, this paradigm shift brings with 
it new security challenges, especially related to securing access 
to the virtual desktop and protecting the sensitive data and 
applications that are used inside it. Lastly, there’s an increasing 
need to address the regulatory and compliance challenges 
related to tracking application and data access inside the 
virtual desktop.

Solution Overview
IBM’s Security Access Manager for Enterprise Single Sign-On 
(SAM E-SSO) integrates with VMWare View™ to provide single 
sign-on and strong authentication to the virtual desktop 
increasing security. Users can now log into their PCs using a 
number of strong authentication factors such as fingerprints, 
smart cards, building access badges, etc. Once logged into 
their desktop, SAM E-SSO automatically signs them into their 
virtual desktop.
SAM E-SSO also provides single sign-on to all the user’s 
applications inside the virtual desktop. This increases user 
productivity and also helps reduce helpdesk costs associated 
with password resets, furthering reducing the organization’s 
TCO of desktops. 

S o l u t i o n   B r i e f   /   1

Solution Brief

FIND Ou T M OrE

 VMware–IBM Alliance:  
http://www.vmware.com/solutions/partners/
alliances/ibm-home.html

VMware View & Desktop Solutions: 
http://www.vmware.com/solutions/desktop/

VMware Horizon Application Manager: 
http://www.vmware.com/products/desktop_
virtualization/horizon/

IBM Security Access Manager for Enterprise 
Single Sign-On:  
http://www-01.ibm.com/software/tivoli/
products/access-mgr-esso/features.html

IBM Security Identity and Access Assurance: 
www-01.ibm.com/software/tivoli/products/
identity-access-assurance/

Contact VMware 
For information or to purchase VMware 
products, call 1-877-VMWARE (outside of North 
America dial +1-650-427-5000), visit 
www.vmware.com/products, or search online for 
an authorized reseller. For detailed product 
specifications and systems requirements, please 
refer to the VMware View documentation.

Secure and Simple Virtual Desktop Access

The organization’s regulatory and compliance requirements, 
especially related to monitoring events such as application 
access and usage inside the virtual desktops can be satisfied 
using SAM E-SSO. The SAM E-SSO agent for virtual desktops 
collects audit information that can be used to generate 
detailed reports for compliance and chargeback accounting 
purposes. 
Also available as a very easy to deploy and manage virtual 
appliance, SAM E-SSO provides substantially faster time to 
value and lower TCO to the organization.

Solution Components
VMware View 
VMware View delivers desktop services from your cloud to 
enable end user freedom and IT management and control.

VMware View allows IT to simplify and automate the 
management of thousands of desktops and to securely deliver 
desktop as a service to users from a central location with levels 
of availability and reliability unmatched by traditional PCs. By 
delivering secure access to applications and data to any device, 
when and where the user needs it, VMware View provides end 
users with the highest levels of mobility and flexibility. 

IBM Security Access Manager for Enterprise Single Sign-On 
SAM E-SSO strengthens access to the virtual desktop and 
enables users to access all their applications inside the virtual 
desktop with a single strong password. This award-winning 
solution simplifies password management, protects 
information with strong authentication, and secures kiosks, 
shared workstations and roaming desktops. The solution also 
facilitates compliance with security and privacy regulations by 
leveraging centralized fine-grained auditing and reporting 
capabilities.

VMware Horizon
VMware® Horizon Application ManagerT is a hosted 
management platform that centralizes IT control for end-user 
computing devices. Horizon gives end users access to 
Windows, SaaS and enterprise web applications across 
different devices while retaining control and visibility via 
policy-driven management.  VMware Horizon Application 
Manager lets you provision and entitle secure access to end 
users, track SaaS license activity, and get usage reports.

Support & Professional Services
VMware offers enterprise-class support to all VMware View 
customers. For customers that require additional services, 
VMware also offers several professional services engagements 
on best practices and getting started with your VMware View 
deployment.

VMware, inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com
Copyright © 2012 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents 
listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned 
herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. Item No: VMW-22940-IBM-SecurityAllianceBrief

