SAN Best Practices Tech Brief 
 

 

Slow Draining Devices 

Virtual Instruments’ VirtualWisdom® is the only product that can help SAN administrators quickly find root 
cause of SAN performance problems, including slow draining devices.  VirtualWisdom’s comprehensive 
instrumentation and Storage Area Network (SAN) I/O measurement capabilities reduce application response 
time, increase availability, and improve resource utilization. 

Problem 
Fibre Channel Network becomes congested; I/O 
becomes bottlenecked; no apparent cause 

Impact 
Application response time slows to unacceptable 
levels.  Latency can cause time-outs. 

Introduction 

We often hear of SAN slowdowns that turn out to be a result of slow draining devices.  It’s frustrating to 
see a SAN become congested with no apparent cause.  Left untreated the result will be slow application 
response time and even latency-induced time-outs.  What is a slow draining device?  Slow draining 
devices are devices that are requesting more information than they can consume.  This can be because 
they are running at a slower link rate than the rest of the environment, or could just mean that other 
factors within the devices are preventing them from functioning as fast as they could.  A slow draining 
device can exist at any link utilization level where achieved throughput into the slow draining port is 
lower compared to the intended throughput.  It’s very important to note it can spread throughout the 
fabric and can slow down traffic unrelated to the slow draining device within the fabric.  

What causes slow draining devices?  The most common cause is within the device or server itself.  If the 
device is overloaded in terms of CPU or memory it may have a hard time handling the data it has 
requested.  Another common cause is devices that have slower link rates then the rest of the 
environment. 

Finding the problem 

Without VirtualWisdom, troubleshooting is often a “trial and error” process.  Both Cisco and Brocade are 
adding features to their switches to help with diagnostics by doing a better job on monitoring buffer-to-
buffer credits.  Let’s consider Brocade as a good example.  Brocade’s Bottleneck Detection identifies 
and alerts administrators to slow drain storage devices causing latency and I/O timeouts, particularly in 
highly virtualized server environments. Top Talkers measures the top bandwidth-consuming traffic 
(including by individual virtual machine) in real time over a physical device connection or throughout a 
network switch.  Ingress Rate Limiting restricts data flow from less-critical hosts at preset bandwidths. 
Traffic Isolation dedicates paths in the fabric to specific data flows, helping to avoid network congestion.  
And QoS expedites critical traffic in the event of congestion while keeping all traffic flowing.  There is 
anecdotal evidence that if the right data gets to the right Brocade or Cisco subject matter experts, they 
may be able to help pinpoint and eliminate the problem. 

There are metrics that help determine if a slowdown is caused by a server side (slow draining) device, 
the storage side, or other issue.  For instance, our VirtualWisdom SAN Availability Probe solution can 
pick up on one of the main symptoms, a credit issue, which causes class 3 discards.  While credit issues 
can be detected or observed with SAN Availability Probe, the offending link can be hard to diagnose, as 
the link that reports the discard usually isn’t the one that is causing the credit issue.  Though there are 
other causes of class 3 discards, the pattern of their occurrence is quite different than the pattern of 
occurrence of class 3 discards due to credit issues. 

VirtualInstruments.com 

 

Another metric that the switches offer is often referred to as “time with zero credit” or something similar, 
it varies by vendor and switch.  But the meaning is basically the same.  Unfortunately, this counter has 
been historically inaccurate and has been more of a red herring than useful for analyzing credit issues.  
But as mentioned above, some of the switch vendors have fixed this counter for their newer switches, 
and we are testing this to see if it is indeed valuable.  

With our SANInsight SAN Performance Probe hardware, Read/Write/Other Exchange Completion Times 
can be easily set to trigger alerts.  Using VirtualWisdom is the best way to detect and diagnose credit 
issues.  This is because it sees the full symptoms of credit issues … which are high latency and large 
numbers of exchanges that remain pending.  You might think that this would require that the probes be 
placed on the link having the credit issue, and while there are a few cases where this is true, by and 
large, the device or devices causing credit starvation can be detected by monitoring the storage ports 
they are accessing.  This is because switches have only two choices when they receive a frame.  They 
have to either route it or drop it within a very short timeframe.  If the switch drops the frame, then the 
class 3 discard counter is incremented.  In order to avoid having to drop frames, lack of credit on a port 
quickly flows back through an environment with a balance between delaying credit and dropping frames.  
As a result, exchange completion times increase.  The number of pending and minimum pending 
exchanges rapidly increases for the devices that are having the biggest impact to credit in the 
environment.  There is also a much larger difference between the “time to first data” measurement 
(which is how long the array takes to provide the first frame of data for a read) and the overall transaction 
time because the arrays are ready with the data but waiting for credit to send it onto the link. 

Mitigating the Problem 

Queue Depth settings can help to mitigate slow draining devices, which are the most common cause of 
credit issues.  Queue depth settings impact the number of transactions that can be open by a device at 
any one time and credit issues deal with individual frames rather than transactions.  By limiting the 
number of transactions you can throttle slow devices down to levels of data that they can consume and 
prevent them from impacting other devices that share some of the same resources such as ISLs and 
storage ports.  Typically, queue depth settings are set too high for optimum performance.  The SAN 
Performance Probe allows users to really see the true impact of the queue depth settings and overall 
latency in the environment.  Adding VirtualWisdom Server Virtualization Probe enables users to see not 
only how the queue depth setting impacts the storage environment, but also to see how it affects overall 
server response times. 

This problem is more common that you might expect and it’s worth adding to your troubleshooting 
methodologies. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Corporate Headquarters 
25 Metro Drive Suite 400 
San Jose, CA 95110 
Phone:  408-579-4000 
Fax:  408-579-4001 

 

Sales 
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Phone:  408-579-4081 

Support 
support@virtualinstruments.com 
 

©2011 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are 
trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or servicemarks 
of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 09/11 

2                                                    VIRTUAL INSTRUMENTS TECH BRIEF 
 

