Technical Brief 
 

	  

 

 

Best Networking Practices for EMC® SRDF® Replication  

Overview  
Most large organizations now replicate key information and systems at one or remote 
sites, as protection against natural or man-made disasters. It is extremely important to 
the health of these organizations that replication processes work as expected, and that 
process latencies are within acceptable limits. The long-distance links supporting your 
SRDF replication process are extremely important and expensive, so being able to 
monitor their usage and to identify problems is vital. Virtual Instrument’s VirtualWisdom® 
offerings help you to efficiently diagnose remote replication problems, to anticipate and 
prevent potential issues, and to confidently plan and execute future replication efforts. 
VirtualWisdom can provide value to your organization as you instrument and measure 
your network, analyze meaningful metrics, and optimize your replication network.  
INST R UM ENT   AND  M EASUR E: VirtualWisdom allows you to examine your 
replication traffic at the link level, analyzing and understanding every conversation 
between your local and remote systems and subsystems. When needed, Virtual 
Instruments SANInsight® Protocol Analyzer can provide an even deeper look, and can 
generate industry-standard “traces” that can be provided electronically to EMC to 
expedite problem resolution. This information is especially valuable when encountering 
intermittent problems or vendor interoperability issues.  In cases where the SAN is not at 
fault when replication problems occur, VirtualWisdom allows you to demonstrate that the 
SAN fabric is operating correctly. 
ANALYZE: VirtualWisdom can be used to examine SRDF replication traffic for any 
unknown or unexpected occurrences, identifying and addressing them before they create 
problems. VirtualWisdom can also be used to “baseline” your replication process during 
periods of normal operation, and then by comparing those statistics with real-time ones, 
you can detect changes in your environment that may cause, or be indicators of, 
imminent problems. 
OPT IM IZE: VirtualWisdom offerings can play a vital role in preparing your replication 
strategy and plans for the future. It can help you understand the complex inter-
relationships between bandwidth, replication speed, cost and reliability, so you can make 
the best decisions for your organization. 
 
Best Practices 
Planning 
Application demand is a key part of planning a remote replication infrastructure. Using 
VirtualWisdom to assess the current environment provides information needed to 
correctly plan the new architecture and layout. By understanding the demand that each 
application will place on the replication infrastructure, the replication pipe can be 
appropriately sized.  It is important to establish a performance baseline and resolve 
existing problems prior to implementing remote replication. An environment that is 

	  

SRDF® Replication 
Network Challenges 
	  
•  WAN problems can mean 

that replication is not 
occurring at the expected 
rate, resulting in 
unacceptably long 
application response 
times, or in increased lag 
times for remote site 
updates to occur 

•  Under-utilized WAN links 

can represent unnecessary 
expense  

•  Achievement of service 

level agreements (SLAs) by 
WAN providers cannot be 
measured or verified 

• Performance issues and 

intermittent failures cannot 
be analyzed or understood 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

	  

Technical Brief 
 

	  
already experiencing even minor issues can add to the complexity of rolling out a remote 
replication infrastructure. Without a baseline it may be difficult to determine if an issue is 
new, a compound problem of a new condition and an old somewhat benign issue, or 
was simply an existing issue that was not detected because the environment was not 
being adequately scrutinized. This can make it very difficult to resolve these issues and 
can cause the replication to be blamed for problems it did not create. Virtual Instruments 
offers a health check assessment service to establish the baseline health and 
performance of the SAN, so that the replication can be applied to a healthy SAN. Now is 
the time to plan the network infrastructure to be analysis-ready. By including Traffic 
Access Points (TAPs) to the replication infrastructure, your network can be readied for 
immediate analysis of problems, and for proactive monitoring to prevent problems. An 
infrastructure that is analysis-ready can prevent future downtime when problems are 
encountered, can minimize the need to chase or recreate intermittent issues, and should 
speed problem resolution. Synchronous remote replication can cause slowdowns of all 
applications when problems arise. These links can become single points of performance 
issues, so they should be very closely monitored. 
Implementation 
Prior to adding replication traffic to your remote link, the link should be tested to ensure 
that its latency times are well within the requirements of the planned replication method. 
Skipping this step can lead to serious problems later, and simply testing the WAN portion 
of the link does not yield an adequate representation of the real latency that will be 
experienced. As each server or application is configured for replication, it is important to 
monitor the performance of the environment. The performance should be compared to 
the baseline established during the planning phase, in order to ensure that there is 
minimal latency introduced by the replication, and that no issues or errors are occurring 
on the new network.  Virtual Instruments provides solutions to monitor the latency as 
well as software to generate various real-world-like loads, so the latency can be trended 
under various conditions. Other Virtual Instruments services can help you test and tune 
the environment before the replication process is online and while it is rolled out. 
Production 
As application demands change, it is important to ensure that the replication method 
(synchronous or asynchronous) is still business-justified. VirtualWisdom can monitor and 
report on these changing demands, so that the associated costs can be compared to the 
current business value of the application and its data. Because problems with remote 
links can affect all of the applications served by a SAN, it is vital to ensure that minor 
errors don’t cascade into major problems. Proactively keeping the minor issues in check 
keeps these links healthy, optimally performing and robust. 
 
 

Corpora t e  He a dqua rt e rs 
25 Metro Drive Suite 400 
San Jose, CA 95110 
Phone:  408-579-4000 
Fax:  408-579-4001 

 

S a le s 
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Phone:  408-579-4081 

S upport  
support@virtualinstruments.com 
 

©2011 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are 
trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or 
servicemarks of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 09/11 
	  

