SAN Best Practices Tech Brief 
 

 

Storage Tiering 

Virtual Instruments’ VirtualWisdom® is the only product that can help SAN administrators quickly find root cause of SAN performance 
problems, including slow draining devices.  VirtualWisdom’s comprehensive instrumentation and Storage Area Network (SAN) I/O 
measurement capabilities reduce application response time, increase availability, and improve resource utilization. 

Problem 

Concern 

Impact 

Business operations automatically ask 
for the “best” performance and 
availability 

It’s difficult to prove to business 
operations that application SLAs can 
be met with less-than-tier-one 
infrastructure 

 

Storage-related CAPEX and 
OPEX are skyrocketing 

Background 

Many organizations hesitate to provision their business critical applications on tier II storage or SATA drives for fear that performance 
won’t meet requirements. Or, their ILM and HSM projects stall because there’s no way to know how tiering will impact users. Picking 
the right storage tier can be risky, because most IT shops do not have the right instrumentation to measure the performance impact of 
tiering.  

With VirtualWisdom, IT organizations have the latency data and other information needed to properly plan and optimize the storage 
environment so that lower cost tier II storage or SATA drives can provide tier I performance.  Organizations that combine 
sophisticated storage planning with Virtual Instrument’s real-time alerting capabilities can prevent user impact as demands change, 
enabling them to realize huge CAPEX improvements. The organization can use tier II or tier III storage for all applications except those 
that actually demand tier I attributes such as enterprise-class replication. When the ILM decision is based on performance, 
VirtualWisdom offers the real-time analysis that proves the effect of the storage on application response time. Using less expensive 
storage can result in $5K – 20K+ per terabyte savings. 

How VirtualWisdom is Different  

In the days of direct-attached storage, when the I/O performance bottleneck was disk transfer rate, existing storage array tools would 
be sufficient to determine where to place data for an optimum balance of performance and costs.  But today, in the world of shared 
storage, it’s much too simplistic to look just at the difference in external transfer rates between a Fibre Channel disk and a SATA disk.  
In today’s SAN you are guaranteed to have bottlenecks somewhere else.  Congestion in the fabric can cause response time to be 100 
times (or more) slower.  Not having HBA queue depths set properly can have a factor of 10 impact on response time.  Errors on the 
links can cause sporadic disturbances increasing  application response by 3,000 times.  Virtual Instruments gives the complete 
picture, not just the storage system reading.  Quite simply, knowing your aggregate IOPS or MB/S on a SAN or even a link is of limited 
help in reducing the risk of moving applications to less expensive storage tiers. 

When you deploy tier 2 storage, typically based on SATA drives and a RAID 5 configuration, dramatic benefits will also be seen from 
reductions in floor space, cooling and power consumption.  When compared to expensive tier 1 storage arrays, typically configured in 
a RAID10 configuration, all of the core SAN environmental costs are improved by over 50% as SATA drives are larger and use far less 
power and cooling per TB of data.  Additional significant savings can be realized in decreased floor space, often helping to postpone 
datacenter build-outs as SATA drives are typically larger than FC drives by a factor of 4 or more, leading to a much lower PB per floor 
tile. Intelligent storage tiering based on actual performance data helps you dramatically reduce both capital and operating expenses.     

 

 

Corporate Headquarters 
25 Metro Drive Suite 400 
San Jose, CA 95110 
Phone:  408-579-4000 
Fax:  408-579-4001 

 

Sales 
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Phone:  408-579-4081 

Support 
support@virtualinstruments.com 
 

©2011 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are 
trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or servicemarks 
of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 09/11 

VirtualInstruments.com 

