 

VBLOCK™ SOLUTION FOR HOSTED 
COLLABORATION 

The Vblock™ Infrastructure Platforms solution for Hosted Collaboration 
makes Cisco® Unified Communications and Collaboration applications 
and capabilities available in a hosted environment. Vblock platforms 
provide standardized units of best-of-breed IT infrastructure that can be 
managed as a single entity and easily scaled as a cohesive, multi-tenant 
system. 

Business Case 

Faced with the need to differentiate their cloud service offerings in a highly competitive market 
and a growing demand for unified communication and collaboration services, service providers 
(SPs) are looking for a comprehensive, flexible, and agile way to provide these services to their 
customers. 

Service providers are also faced with increasingly constrained operational expense budgets 
and are demanding greater operational efficiency from their infrastructure. To accelerate the 
time to market of competitive cloud-based communication and collaboration services, service 
providers need reliable infrastructure to customize and turn up services. 

Solution 

The Vblock solution for hosted collaboration allows SPs to create unified, standardized, 
subscription-based “as-a-service” packages of Cisco Unified Communications applications 
using the Cisco Hosted Collaboration Solution (HCS). A comprehensive cloud-based HCS 
service allows enterprises to focus on their core competencies, while SPs address the growing 
market demand to deliver rich media services—on any device, anywhere. HCS supports a wide 
spectrum of services from basic IP telephony and voicemail to advanced unified presence and 
WebEx® conferencing capabilities. SPs can leverage the converged infrastructure of the Vblock 
platform to host these services in a highly available, multi-tenant environment.  

Highlights 

  Tiered HCS services on the 

Vblock platform in a multi-

tenant environment offer 

economies of scale that 

generate new revenue 

streams 

  Rapid provisioning of new 

services and 

comprehensive monitoring 

capabilities provide an 

enhanced customer 

experience 

  Manage the converged 
compute, network, and 

storage infrastructure as a 

single entity 

  Scale out infrastructure 
within and across data 

centers to accommodate 

growth in services 

   Scale up infrastructure to 

deliver feature-laden 

services like media-rich 

collaboration, messaging, 

presence, and mobility 

  Integrated planning, design, 

and Implementation (PDI) 

services for Vblock platform 
and HCS applications 

© 2011 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. 

 

 

 

 

 

Key Benefits 

Key benefits of deploying the Cisco Hosted Collaboration Solution on a Vblock platform are: 

  On-site installation, configuration, and performance tuning of the Vblock platform speeds time to revenue. 

  Pre-engineered, pre-configured, validated Vblock platform infrastructure components ensures successful 

and rapid deployment of infrastructure and HCS applications. 

  Standardized deployment process for HCS services enables rapid end customer turn-up. 

  Service providers can offer tiered HCS service bundles that maximize revenue potential while optimizing 

CapEx and lowering OpEx. 

  Service providers can scale the Vblock platform up and out as a cohesive system, to maintain balanced, 

measurable, and consistent performance as needs change and demand for HCS services grows. 

  HCS hosted on the Vblock platform provides highly available services at lower cost per user resulting in 

increased profits. 

Key Differentiator 

  Customized sizing guidelines for HCS on the Vblock platform take much of the guesswork out of the 

traditional HCS challenges of storage provisioning, sizing, scaling, and configuration. 

  Unique, comprehensive approach by VCE and Cisco provide services and support that enable partner 

SPs to  deliver HCS services from the service design phase through development, deployment, and 
support of those services. 

  VCE validation of Vblock platform infrastructure components ensures a predictable performance envelop 

and availability guidelines for an enhanced customer experience with significantly faster time to value. 

© 2011 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

 

 

 

Vblock Infrastructure Platforms 

With Vblock Infrastructure Platforms, VCE delivers the industry’s first completely integrated IT offering that 
combines best of breed virtualization, networking, computing, storage, security, and management technologies 
with end-to-end vendor accountability. This converged infrastructure enables rapid virtualization deployment, so 
customers quickly see a return on investment (ROI). Vblock Infrastructure Platforms offer varying storage 
capacities, processing and network performance, and they support such incremental capabilities as enhanced 
security and business continuity. 

Next Steps 

To learn more about the Vblock Solution for Hosted Collaboration and other solutions, contact a VCE 
representative or visit www.vce.com. 

ABOUT VCE 
VCE, the Virtual Computing Environment Company formed by Cisco and EMC with investments from VMware and Intel, 

accelerates the adoption of converged infrastructure and cloud-based computing models that dramatically reduce the 

cost of IT while improving time to market for our customers. VCE, through the Vblock platform, delivers the industry's first 

completely integrated IT offering with end-to-end vendor accountability. VCE's prepackaged solutions are available 

through an extensive partner network, and cover horizontal applications, vertical industry offerings, and application 

development environments, allowing customers to focus on business innovation instead of integrating, validating and 

managing IT infrastructure. For more information, go to www.vce.com. 

 

 

 
Copyright © 2011 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, 
LLC. and/or its affiliates in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. 

 

 

© 2011 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

 

 

