 

VirtualWisdom 
increases the benefits 
of Vblock™ systems  

•  Reduces the risk of 

virtualizing more mission 
critical applications 

•  Reduces the risk of 

deploying more VMs per 
physical server 

•  Enables more aggressive 
use of tiered storage by 
improved tiered storage 
planning and ability to prove 
performance SLAs 

•  Enables operational (OpEx) 
savings through improved 
operations and faster Vblock 
performance troubleshooting 

•  Provides better adherence 
to, and monitoring of SLAs 
and external regulations  

•  Leads to improved cycle 
time through accelerated 
application deployments  

•  Reduces unplanned 

downtime 

 

 

 Technical Brief 

 

 
Ensuring Performance & Availability of your 
VCE Vblock™ Infrastructure Platform Series 
700 with VirtualWisdom® 

 

 

Introduction 

Leading IT organizations continue to shift to increased use of virtualization and private cloud 
computing to lower the cost of IT operations and to ensure a more agile IT infrastructure that 
responds more quickly to changing business priorities.  The VCE Vblock™ Infrastructure 
Platform Series 700 simplifies and accelerates deployment of a virtualized infrastructure by 
integrating state-of-the art Cisco, EMC and VMware components.  Vblock™ systems are 
carefully configured to ensure maximum compatibility between components as well as 
assurance that upgrades, patches, and management changes are all handled in a pre-tested, 
coordinated fashion.    

What Vblock™ Infrastructure Platforms lack is comprehensive end-to-end real-time monitoring 
that ensures the performance and availability of the infrastructure that supports your business-
critical applications.  Virtual Instruments VirtualWisdom® is an innovative real-time end to end 
monitoring and optimization solution that helps IT organizations realize the full economic 
benefits of networked storage and server virtualization, including environments running VCE’s 
Vblock™ Infrastructure Platforms. VirtualWisdom dramatically reduces the risk of infrastructure 
problems that would affect your end-users and your revenues. 

VirtualWisdom’s Value Add 
VirtualWisdom enables:  

•  Operational (OpEx) savings through faster Mean Time to Resolution (MTTR) and fewer 

trouble-tickets 

•  Capital expenditure (CapEx) savings by eliminating over-provisioning and over-tiering  
•  Better adherence to, and monitoring of performance and availability SLAs  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

• 
• 
• 

 Technical Brief 

 

 

Improved cycle time through accelerated application and SAN deployments  
Increased use of server virtualization and more VMs per server 
Increased deployment of mission-critical applications on Vblock platforms 

VirtualWisdom Infrastructure Optimization Platform 

VirtualWisdom provides comprehensive instrumentation and measurement capabilities of the 
SAN and virtualized infrastructure that improve application response time, accelerate storage 
I/O performance, increase availability, and improve server and SAN utilization. VirtualWisdom is 
the only solution that can non-intrusively improve the performance of virtualized applications in 
real-time by analyzing actual I/O traffic data from the VM to the LUN.  VirtualWisdom monitors, 
records, and analyzes every transaction from the virtual server to the LUN, enabling an 
unmatched level of application availability and performance assurance.   

How VirtualWisdom Complements Vblock™ Management Tools 

Though the VCE Vblock suite of management tools does some basic level of performance 
monitoring, it lacks physical, real-time monitoring of every transaction in the entire I/O path, and 
cannot prove where in the system an application performance problem is occurring.  
VirtualWisdom collects crucial link layer data, as well as the higher level data from the switches 
and servers, and offers unprecedented cross-domain correlation across the entire environment.  
VirtualWisdom is the only platform that can non-intrusively optimize the performance of 
applications, in continuous real-time, by measuring actual I/O traffic data.  The vendor-supplied 
management tools from Cisco, EMC and VMware are primarily used for provisioning, 
administering and capacity planning for their own devices.  These tools also provide a high 
level, non real-time view of performance that is insufficient for business-critical applications.   
To these vendor-supplied tools, VirtualWisdom: 
•  Adds continuous real time monitoring and filtering that calculates statistics based on 
seeing every SAN transaction, while adding no latency or risk.  Vblock™ management 
products use polling or averaging techniques that simply do not see every transaction and 
frequently miss the causes of business-impacting problems. 
Instantly proves whether or not the I/O subsystem is the cause of application slowdowns, 
often reducing root cause analysis from weeks/days to hours/minutes.   

• 

•  Due to physical layer access to the I/O, reduces time spent on problem resolution with early 

detection of I/O performance bottlenecks and transmission faults, also contributing to 
problem avoidance. 

•  Enables “what if” analyses using actual production data, substantially improving capacity 

planning and optimization of the Vblock™ infrastructure. 

•  Adds event recording and real time (to the millisecond) capture capabilities and does not 
rely on “averages” or polling, which often occurs in 5 minute or longer intervals.  Polling 
and averaging invariably miss meaningful transaction events, leading to increased risk to 
application availability and performance. 

•  Adds the ability to gather in-depth Fibre Channel network statistics such as pending 

exchanges, to tune the system for maximum performance. 

•  Adds the ability to determine if configuration changes and infrastructure upgrades are 

affecting performance by examining end to end I/O latency, not just latency at the 
component level.  The net benefit of this is that it accelerates the deployment and reduces 
the risk of implementing virtualized I/O-intensive business-critical applications such as 
Oracle, SAP, DB2, SQL, and Exchange  

•  Eliminates all performance risks in tiering decisions by measuring the actual effect of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 Technical Brief 

 

 

 

 

 

• 

• 

• 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
Virtual Instruments 
25 Metro Drive 
San Jose, CA 95110 
www.virtualinstruments.com 

Sales Information  
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Phone: 408-579-4080  (US & 
Canada), +44 (0) 203-402-3353 
(European Headquarters) 

Customer Support  
support@virtualinstruments.com  
 
©2012 Virtual Instruments. All rights 
reserved. Features and specifications are 
subject to change without notice. 
VirtualWisdom®, Virtual Instruments, 
SANInsight are trademarks or registered 
trademarks in the United States and/or in 
other countries. All other brands, 
products, or service names are or may be 
trademarks or service marks of, and are 
used to identify, products or services of 
their respective owners.    03/12 

 

move on application response time.  Vblock™ management tools typically use only IOPS, 
MB/s or access frequency to recommend moving data to another tier.   
Lowers overall downtime by generating predictive data on potential virtual infrastructure 
problems 
Improves virtualized application performance by enabling administrators to optimally 
balance virtualized workloads based on I/O response time to each LUN, not just CPU and 
memory utilization 
Lowers overall operating expenses and capital expenses through ESX / ESXi server 
modeling and higher utilization of Vblock™ assets 

Topology example 

 

Vblock™ Infrastructure Platform Series 700 Enhanced by VirtualWisdom 

The preceding diagram shows how VirtualWisdom architecturally complements the Vblock™ 
Series 700.  Virtual Instruments TAP Patch Panels are inserted in between the Cisco MDS 
Fabric switches and the EMC VMAX storage arrays.  TAP Patch Panels replace standard non-
tapped patch panels and provide access to the physical FC protocol layer in a non-intrusive 
way that has no impact on performance or data transmission.  The Tapped Patch Panels send a 
portion of the fiber optic signal to the VirtualWisdom SAN Performance Probe for aggregation 
by the VirtualWisdom Server.  The VirtualWisdom Server also gathers data from the 
VirtualWisdom Virtual Server Probe that interfaces with the vCenter Server and the 
VirtualWisdom SAN Availability Probe which gathers data from the Cisco MDS switches.  All 
performance, utilization, and transmission data is collected, correlated and analyzed by the 
VirtualWisdom Server through its dashboard and reporting GUI. 

Summary 

VirtualWisdom increases the value of the VCE Vblock™ environment via more aggressive use of 
tiered storage, faster troubleshooting, full monitoring of performance and availability SLAs, 
whilst in parallel lowering the risk of deploying more VMs per server and virtualizing mission 
critical applications. 

 

 

