 

VCE VIRTUAL DESKTOP INFRASTRUCTURE 
(VDI) ACCELERATOR SERVICE  

 

 
Overview 
 
The Virtual Desktop infrastructure (VDI) Accelerator Service 
 
for VblockTM Infrastructure Platforms helps customers jump-
 
start their VDI deployment by delivering assessment, planning, 
and design services for the Vblock platform. This VCE-
validated service delivers specialized toolsets, experienced 
consultants, and a well-defined service offering on an 
accelerated timeline. 

The VDI Accelerator consists of five major service 
components: 

  Desktop and Application Virtualization Analysis 

  VDI and Application Virtualization Roadmap 

Development 

  VDI Plan and Design 

  VDI Design Validation Pilot  

  VDI Transition Services Resident (Optional) 

Service Benefits 
Accelerate the implementation of Virtual Desktop Infrastructure 
solutions on Vblock Infrastructure Platforms  by:  

  Mitigating risk by leveraging experienced consultants, 

proven design, and reference architectures  

  Executing a phased implementation guided by a Virtual 

Desktop and Application Virtualization roadmap  

  Achieving initial VDI rollout within 3–4 months 

Enterprise Desktop and Application Assessment 
The VDI Accelerator starts with a Desktop and Application 
Assessment to help customers inventory and analyze their 
existing environment, focusing  on inventory, performance, 
and usage. Comprehensive analysis and detailed reporting 
highlights critical VDI success factors and enables customers 
to both better understand their existing environment and 
validate their overall VDI plans. 

The service also delivers a 7-point assessment of applications 
in the customer’s target environment, enabling coordination of 
VDI deployment with application virtualization. 

 

© 2011 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. 

 

 
VDI and Application Virtualization Roadmap 
Upon completion of the assessment, the VCE team will 
develop a VDI and Application Virtualization Roadmap based 
on defined business drivers, collected user data, and 
advanced application analysis.  

This implementation roadmap defines a phased, actionable 
plan that clearly identifies specific VDI and application 
virtualization use-cases bundled into logical project phases. 
The roadmap also delivers VDI capacity planning data for 
hardware sizing as well as a comprehensive implementation 
level-of-effort based on selected use-cases. 

The implementation roadmap serves as a detailed and 
actionable plan for moving forward with a large VDI initiative. 
Additionally, customers will be able to update the roadmap on 
a continuing basis in order to take into account changing 
business drivers, additional user data, and modified timelines. 

VDI Plan and Design 
The VDI Plan and Design service provides a comprehensive 
architectural design for VDI on the Vblock system. Based on 
VCE’s desktop reference architecture and best practices, this 
service delivers an architectural design aimed at both 
satisfying end user computing requirements and minimizing 
the impact of the deployment on both end users and IT 
support staff.  

VDI Plan and Design Deliverables include: 

  VDI on Vblock Infrastructure Platforms Architecture 

Design 

  VDI Installation and Configuration Procedures 

  VDI Design Verification Procedures 

  VDI Operational Procedures 

  Knowledge transfer to customer during design  

VDI Design Validation Pilot  
During the VDI Design Validation Pilot, the VCE consulting 
team will work with the customer to deploy desktops with 
customer-selected use-cases. This initial pilot deployment 
focuses on design validation and end user experience 
validation.  

 
For More Information 
More information about VCE solutions is available at 
www.vce.com and from your VCE representative. 

 

 

For More Information 
More information about VCE solutions is available at 
www.vce.com and from your VCE representative. 

ABOUT VCE 
VCE, the Virtual Computing Environment Company formed by 

Cisco and EMC with investments from VMware and Intel, 

accelerates the adoption of converged infrastructure and 

cloud-based computing models that dramatically reduce the 

cost of IT while improving time to market for our customers. 

VCE, through the Vblock platform, delivers the industry's first 

completely integrated IT offering with end-to-end vendor 

accountability. VCE's prepackaged solutions are available 

through an extensive partner network, and cover horizontal 

applications, vertical industry offerings, and application 

development environments, allowing customers to focus on 

business innovation instead of integrating, validating and 

managing IT infrastructure. 

 

For more information, go to www.vce.com. 

 

 
The VCE team will deliver a comprehensive list of critical 
success factors (CSFs) that will be used to measure the 
success of the pilot. 

Any gaps in either user experience or technical design will be 
identified and addressed during this phase in order to drive a 
successful rollout. 

Transition Services Resident (Optional) 
For customers who wish assistance with next steps, VCE will 
provide the services of a certified Transitional Services 
Resident (TSR) for two months. The TSR delivers senior 
consultant expertise and may be used to assist with ongoing 
production VDI rollout. The TSR roles and responsibilities may 
include: 

  Knowledge transfer to in-house technical staff 

  Assistance with planning, execution and troubleshooting 

  Augmenting in-house resources to accelerate VDI 

adoption 

  Providing continuity for initial production rollout 

  Jump-starting initial production rollout 
 
The TSR will have access to key resources at Cisco, EMC, 
and VMware in order to deliver best-practice approaches for 
deployment and management. The TSR’s services can be 
renewed in three-month blocks as required.  

 

 
 

Services Delivery Duration 
A VDI Accelerator Service for Vblock systems typically is 
delivered over a period of 2–3 calendar months:  

  Desktop and App Assessment – 2 Weeks 

  VDI and App Virtualization Roadmap – 2 Weeks 

  View Plan and Design – 3 Weeks 

  VDI Design Validation Pilot – 4 Weeks 

 

Optional TSR services selected by the customer would add to 
the duration. 

 

 

 

 
Copyright © 2011 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, LLC. and/or its affiliates 
in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. 

  

© 2011 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

 

 

 

