Information Brief  
 
 

 

 

 

 

Mission Critical Applications on 

x86 Platforms 

Eliminating VMware / Storage Related Performance Challenges 

with VirtualWisdom® 

 

August, 2011 

 

 

VirtualInstruments.com 

 

 
Introduction 

Whether on a virtualized or non-virtualized platform, application performance is heavily affected by its 
underlying storage infrastructure.  In fact storage related problems are reported by VMware as the cause 
of 80%+ of VMware related performance problems.   

Though most industry analysts flatly state that there’s no technical reason to not put mission critical 
applications on virtual servers on x86 architecture, many IT professionals remain skeptical.  This is often 
referred to as the “virtual stall”. This document addresses how to proactively deal with the performance 
and troubleshooting related issues found in a Fibre Channel SAN / vSphere on x86 environment. Using 
Virtual Instruments’ revolutionary platform, VirtualWisdom, this document showcases the need for a 
comprehensive and real-time view to proactively deal with performance issues in a virtual server and 
SAN environment, enabling IT operations to deliver the performance and availability SLAs demanded by 
mission critical application owners. 

The Beginning of the Performance Problem Cycle 

The cycle typically starts when application owners requesting Virtual Machines begin to ask for over-
provisioned resources to ensure they have no performance issues. This in turn exerts pressure on VM 
administrators to overprovision Memory and CPU to avoid any potential application slowdowns being 
falsely ascribed to vSphere. In terms of storage, the VM administrator will falsely think along the lines of 
capacity that needs to be added to their VMFS and subsequently request the amount of storage they 
feel is best to satisfy the performance requirements of their Virtual Machines. At best they may request 
the RAID level and the type of storage, e.g. 15K RPM FC disks.  It is here that the discrepancy arises for 
the storage administrator. The storage admin, used to provisioning LUNs on the basis of application 
requirements, will instead not be thinking of capacity but rather in terms IOPS and RAID levels. 
Eventually, though as there is no one-to-one mapping and the requested LUN is to be merely added to a 
VMFS, the storage administrator, not wishing to be the bottleneck of the process, will proceed to add 
the requested LUN to the pool. This is the source of a lot of eventual performance problems as overtly 
busy LUNs begin to affect all of their aligned virtual machines as well as those that share the same 
datastore.  Moreover, if the LUN is part of a very busy RAID group on the backend of the storage 
system, such saturated I/O will impact all of the related physical spindles and hence all of the LUNS they 
share. The workload of individual applications presented to individual volumes will be significantly 
different to that of multiple applications being consolidated onto a single VMFS volume. The numerous 
I/Os of multiple applications alone, even if sequential, will push the storage system to deal with these 
numerous requests as random, thus requiring different considerations than those for individual 
applications, such as RAID level, LUN layout, cache capacity, etc..  

So how do you bring true visibility and insight into vSphere’s storage I/O stack? 

Looking Beyond Device-Specific and Averaged-Out Metrics 

Currently, despite the plethora of VM/storage related products and tools in the market, the performance 
metrics they provide on VM memory, CPU, Network and Disk I/O are all polling and depending on 
metrics averaged over the sampling period, usually from vCenter, the storage system, or both. The 
conundrum with such device-specific views is that true I/O latency is often missed, especially when 
these issues occur intermittently or only during peak periods, and therefore beyond the scope of the 
‘averages’. At best, such tools may give you the highest peak in that given averaged out time frame, but 
even this misses the true picture of what is occurring.  

2                                                    VIRTUAL INSTRUMENTS INFO BRIEF 
 

 

The Need for a Comprehensive View that Incorporates Exchange Completion Times  

To fully understand application requirements prior to virtualization and have an insight into storage 
related performance problems, it’s vital to have a solution that reports in real time and on the Exchange 
Completion Time.  By being able to measure the Exchange Completion Time, administrators are 
empowered with the knowledge of the exact amount of time it takes for that all frames and sequences 
have passed from the host to the storage port to the LUN and acknowledged back to the host. Coupled 
with the metrics taken from vCenter via the VirtualWisdom Virtual Server Probe and from the switches 
via the VirtualWisdom SAN Availability Probe, VirtualWisdom provides a comprehensive, real-time 
monitoring system that is out of band and able to report on application I/O latency down to the sub-
millisecond level. This ability to accurately measure response time also bridges the gap between the 
application, server and storage silos. The VM and storage administrator, together with the application 
owner, can work together to optimize virtualized applications, and deliver SLAs that can effectively 
overcome the “virtual stall”.  

Historical Trending and Playback That Goes Beyond Disk I/O Metrics 

With the knowledge of Exchange Completion Times, long, laborious and often aimless troubleshooting 
can be avoided. For example, if we see the graph below, VirtualWisdom reports the disk I/O from 
vCenter having no issues. When we look at the corresponding and more accurate Exchange Completion 
Times we are in fact seeing significant latency. 

Here, we have the read and write metrics from vCenter indicating latency of the given ESX servers to be 
14-19ms. The more accurate Exchange Completion Time gives a radically different reading of 40-43ms. 
With a Tier 1 application that’s been virtualized, such metrics are vital in eliminating potential slowdowns 
or worse still, unplanned downtime. In fact, such discrepancies are common in situations where host-
based measurements are relied upon. 

Additionally, if monitoring is relied upon a use of a host based tool, such a tool would use server CPU 
and memory which in itself causes latency. Server administrators are often falsely led to believe there’s 
latency occurring 
elsewhere when 
in fact it’s the 
servers 
themselves that 
have become 
overloaded. An 
end-to-end 
comprehensive 
view is the 
solution to this 
problem. 

3                                                    VIRTUAL INSTRUMENTS INFO BRIEF 
 

 

Other availability and performance optimization methods, through VirtualWisdom 

Though covering more deeply in the associated Virtual Instruments whitepaper, follow are examples of 
other areas that can be optimized, improving availability and performance of applications virtualized on 
x86 platforms.   

Ensuring the I/O for SIOC - while SIOC can bring great dividends in solving storage / vSphere related 
problems, if there are still underlying problems with the storage configuration or the SAN fabric, the 
benefits of SIOC will still not be fully realized.  

Ensuring Multipathing is Not at Risk via Imbalanced Throughput - VirtualWisdom enables users to see the actual 
throughput on their HBAs, SAN ports and storage ports and even allows them to historically trace back 
and trend this data. VirtualWisdom provides the ability to quickly detect or be alerted of imbalances 
ensuring that the I/O load can proactively be spread or balanced across multiple devices, satisfying the 
I/O demand.  

Optimizing Queue Depth - with VirtualWisdom, users are now empowered with the only solution that can 
measure real-time aggregated queue depth regardless of storage vendor or device, i.e. in a 
comprehensive manner that takes into consideration the whole process from Initiator to Target to LUN. 
VirtualWisdom’s unique ability to do this ensures that storage ports are optimized for maximum 
application health, performance, and SAN efficiency.  

Balance I/O Traffic to Ensure Successful Storage vMotion Operations - to counter complaints that Storage 
vMotion is slow or even fails, and to be best prepared for Storage vMotion operations, VirtualWisdom 
can deliver clear insight of SAN utilization and to ensure that I/O traffic is correctly balanced.  

Getting the Most from VAAI Primitives - VirtualWisdom’s value in gaining the most from VAAI includes its 
ability to identify and enable the proactive elimination of physical layer issues which may exist, and 
consequently hinder the benefits of VAAI.  

Avoiding Performance Degradation Caused by Poor Balancing - VirtualWisdom’s granular, real-time reporting 
and alerting can help avoid situations where performance is degraded by the Datastore or VM’s RDM 
LUNs being provisioned on very busy RAID groups or aligned to poorly balanced back-end processors 
on the storage system.  

Identifying VM to LUN Correlations – in the case of RDMs, VirtualWisdom can provide correlations from the 
VM to the LUN by deploying N_Port ID Virtualization (NPIV), effectively reducing the barriers between 
storage and server optimization. 

Conclusion 

For vSphere managers, VirtualWisdom adds SAN I/O intelligence for comprehensive performance 
optimization and availability assurance, enabling a more aggressive deployment of virtual machines 
based on real-time measurements and feedback of I/O performance. By identifying potential virtualized 
application performance bottlenecks, VirtualWisdom results in significantly higher virtual infrastructure 
utilization and helps administrators deliver on the promise of reduced capital and operational costs and 
improved business agility promised by server virtualization on the x86 platform. 

 

 

Corporate Headquarters 
25 Metro Drive Suite 400 
San Jose, CA 95110 
Phone:  408-579-4000 
Fax:  408-579-4001 

 

Sales 
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Phone:  408-579-4081 

Support 
support@virtualinstruments.com 
 

©2011 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are 
trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or servicemarks 
of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 08/11 

4                                                    VIRTUAL INSTRUMENTS INFO BRIEF 
 

