VI READY VALUE GUIDE

Virtual Instruments Summary
Virtual Instruments’ Infrastructure Performance Management (IPM) platform monitors an 
organizations’ IT infrastructure supporting mission-critical applications, providing real-time visibility 
into the performance, availability and health of the entire computing environment—enabling 
operational efficiency and hyper-fast mean time to resolution.

Why VI is needed:
Mission-critical applications must always be available and operating at peak performance to 
satisfy demanding end-users. Enabling this has required IT infrastructures—from server to 
storage—to be virtualized and abstracted to a point of never-ending  complexity.  Guaranteeing 
application availability and performance in this "new normal" state requires an unbiased, 
real-time understanding of how the IT infrastructures supporting mission-critical applications is 
performing.   

VirtualWisdom® IPM Architecture

Not having TAPs installed in 
your IT infrastructure is as 
dangerous as not having a fire 
sprinkler system installed in 
your office infrastructure!

Chief Operations Officer –
Major Insurance Firm

Why VI READY?

(cid:127) VI READY is defined as an infrastructure that is already fitted with TAPs.
(cid:127) Being VI READY is an insurance policy that when an 

infrastructure is compromised, resolution via the VirtualWisdom 
IPM platform will be quick, easy and without interruption.

(cid:127) Being VI READY eliminates costly downtime.

What is a TAP?
(cid:127) A TAP is a passive optical device that reads light directly off the wire without impacting 

performance.  

(cid:127) A TAP creates a passive, non-impacting entrance point for acquiring real-time data with 

sub-second granularity for the VirtualWisdom IPM platform.
(cid:127) A TAP creates acute visibility that cuts-through infrastructure

complexity and the haze of virtualization.

(cid:127) A TAP  provides a  view into all transactions and traffic flowing throughout

heterogeneous IT infrastructures.

(cid:127) A TAP operates “out-of-band” by diverting a minute portion of the light signal through to the 

VirtualWisdom IPM platform for failure analysis, fast trouble shooting, and performance 
monitoring and tuning.

(cid:127) TAPs are rapidly becoming an industry standard, and manufactured by leading data center 

component companies including Corning.

The Value
Proactive Protection – Tapping an infrastructure  guarantees that when a VI assessment or  VI 
troubleshooting service is needed the environment is VI READY.
Application Performance Guarantee - VirtualWisdom IPM is the only solution that measures an 
application’s performance in real-time throughout the IT infrastructure that supports it. Other 
solutions measure an average over time which is inadequate when running critical 
applications in high IO computing environments.

Infrastructure Availability Guarantee – VirtualWisdom IPM is heterogeneous and unbiased, and 
collects data from various devices without vendor or product dependences. The 
VirtualWisdom IPM platform eliminates vendor finger pointing, supports vendor innocence 
and accountability, and gets to the root cause of issues quickly.

Operational Efﬁciency – VirtualWisdom IPM lowers risk and cost, and aligns infrastructure with 
business and application requirements. 

(cid:127) TAP Patch Panel System - provides a passive, real-time access point enabling a  

view into Fibre Channel network traffic. The TAP can be integrated into a Fibre Channel 
Patch Panel for simple deployment

(cid:127) VirtualWisdom Probes – Through VI’s agentless tapping architecture, VI probes 

continuously capture system-wide performance, utilization and health metrics throughout 
heterogeneous physical, virtual and cloud computing environments.  

(cid:127) VirtualWisdom Dashboard –is a real-time summary display that correlates and analyzes 
data from all VirtualWisdom probes into a single view.  Its intuitive interface is used to 
view infrastructure activity and create reports and alarms.

When to TAP
(cid:127) Infrastructure upgrades
(cid:127) New infrastructure device and component installations

(Server, Switch, SAN, Storage, etc.)

(cid:127) Disaster recovery, migrations and consolidation projects 
(cid:127) During scheduled maintenance windows
(cid:127) Cloud initiatives
(cid:127) Limited infrastructure visibility is stopping/postponing the movement of applications to the   

cloud because of the inability to guarantee an applications performance and availability

Who Cares?
Organizations with large complex heterogeneous infrastructures and Fibre-channel SAN 
deployments that support mission critical applications—where continuous performance and 
availability is critical to the success of the business. 

Physical Plant Teams –  VI READY is an IT “best practice” being endorsed by top IT 
executives worldwide – VirtualWisdom validates the complete infrastructure from cable 
structure to host.
IT Operations – Need to transform infrastructure management from reactive to proactive.
Application Owners – Need to establish and exceed application performance SLA’s.
Storage Teams – Always singled-out as the culprit for performance degradation. 
VirtualWisdom increases productivity, quickly identifies root causes of issues, eliminates 
vendor finger-pointing and aligns application workloads to proper resources.
CIO/CFO/CEO – Enable their teams to do more with less, and do it better - VirtualWisdom 
guarantees performance of business operations, efficiency and profitability.

EXPLORATORY  QUESTIONS

Environment

“Do you have a large, complex Fiber-Channel Environment?”

Health

“Is your business impacted if your applications are not available?”

Performance

Guarantee

“Is increasing infrastructure performance, driving greater utilization of 
existing resources, and lowering operating expenses important to you?”

“How important is it for you and your organization to guarantee performance,     
health and availability of your IT infrastructure supporting mission-critical 
applications?”

How to Get Started
1. VI READY - TAP the Physical Infrastructure

Tapping is the 1st step to accelerating problem resolution.  Installing TAPs when  new 
infrastructure (Server, SAN, Storage, etc.) devices are deployed ensures that your 
infrastructure is VI Ready.

2. VI Services 

VI offers a suite of portable services that can be deployed quickly into VI READY 
infrastructures

(cid:127) VI SOS-4-IPM – Service –  Emergency 24X7 “fly-in” Infrastructure troubleshooting service
(cid:127) Critical Infrastructure Audit- When the infrastructure needs a tune-or an assessment to 

improve performance, availability and health

3. Continuous Real-Time Infrastructure Monitoring (Hardware/Software)

Monitoring with TAPs, hardware and software probes enables continuous optimization of 
performance, utilization, and availability for mission critical applications and infrastructure. 

Sell TAPs f Engage Virtual Instruments Services f Sell Virtual Instruments Solutions

VI Ready
Sell TAP Patch Panels 
at time of storage or 
networking purchase

VI Services
Health Scan
SOS4IPM
Proof of Value

Implement Full Solution 
with HW & SW
VirtualWisdom
Virtual Server Probe
SAN Availability Probe
SAN Performance Probe

FAQ
1. Aren’t TAPs disruptive to my infrastructure?

a. TAPs are integrated with several industry leading  Fibre Channel patch panel 

systems for easy deployment.

b. TAPs can be installed during any infrastructure change or maintenance window.

2. Won’t TAPs degrade the FC signal and introduce latency?

a. The passive TAP does not introduce any latency or overhead and has no impact 

on application or infrastructure performance.

3. How do TAPs work?

a. TAPs are non-powered, non-mechanical devices that use a fiber optical coupler to 

reflect a small portion of the signal to a monitoring port without interrupting or 
impacting live network traffic.

4. How many TAP ports do I need?

a. Best practice is to match the number of TAP ports to the number of storage ports 

that need monitoring.

5. I already have monitoring tools, why do I need VirtualWisdom IPM?

a. These tools are great for providing SAN management capabilities; VirtualWisdom 

IPM complements them and adds value by enabling unbiased, real-time 
system-wide infrastructure performance management. 

6. Is an integrated TAP solution better than one that is not?

a. Yes, typically integrated solutions add a “ Zero–U” footprint that improves rack 

utilization, and can be added or removed without interruption to the live network 
link.

Resources
Contact Virtual Instruments
More information on VirtualWisdom®
virtualinstruments.com/products/about-virtualwisdom
Partner Contacts
dl-partneropportunities@virtualinstruments.com

