Windows XP 
Deployment Guide

For VMware® View™

W H I T E   P A P E R

VMware® View™ transforms the way customers use and manage desktop operating systems. Desktop instances can 
be deployed rapidly in secure datacenters to facilitate high availability and disaster recovery, protect the integrity 
of enterprise information, and remove data from local devices that are susceptible to theft or loss. Isolating each 
desktop instance in its own virtual machine eliminates typical application compatibility issues and improves users’ 
personal computing environments.

About This Guide
This guide suggests best practices for creating Windows XP–based templates for use with View 5 and later.

Creating the Initial Virtual Machine
The initial virtual machine establishes a virtual hardware profile for rapid deployment of other virtual desktop 
instances. You can create the initial virtual machine from scratch, as described in this guide, or convert a physical 
machine to a virtual machine, using either the standalone version of VMware vCenter™ Converter™ or the version 
integrated with VMware vCenter. VMware Converter images the target PC and migrates it into VMware vSphere®. 
When the migration is complete, you can convert the virtual machine to a template and then use it as the basis for 
deploying future virtual desktops.

To create the initial virtual machine from scratch, follow these steps:

1.  Use the vSphere Client™ to connect to your vCenter server.
2.  Use the console to configure the initial virtual machine or template.
3. 

Install the OS using the console.

When you establish a connection with your vSphere datacenter, create a new virtual machine from inventory. 
When you create a virtual machine, the New Virtual Machine wizard appears. Use the custom configuration 
parameters in Table 1 as baseline settings for the template. If you use View 5.x as your virtual desktop manager for 
deploying pooled virtual desktops, you can change these settings at deployment time.

Table 1. Custom Configuration Parameters

Param e ter

Com m ents

Name and Location

This can be a generic name, such as xptemplate. The location can be any folder 
within your datacenter inventory.

Host/Cluster

The VMware ESX®/VMware ESXi™ server or cluster of server resources that will run this 
virtual machine. It can be changed at any time. This location does not necessarily 
specify the location of future virtual machines created from this template.

Resource Pool

If the physical ESX/ESXi server resources are divided granularly using resource pools, 
they can be assigned to this virtual machine.

Datastore

The location where you want to store the files associated with the virtual machine.

Guest Operating System

The operating system that will be installed.

CPUs

The number of virtual processors that will be presented to the virtual machine. For 
most View users, a single processor is sufficient.

W H I T E   P A P E R   /   2

Windows XP Deployment GuideParam e ter

Com m ents

Memory

Network

I/O Adapters

Disk

The amount of memory to allocate to each virtual machine created from this template 
(in most cases, 512MB, for Windows XP).

The number of virtual network adapters that will be used. One is usually enough. As a 
best practice, make the network name consistent across vSphere. An incorrect network 
name in a template can cause failures during the instance customization phases.

The LSI Logic adapter issued for deployments based on View is recommended; however, 
the LSI Logic driver is not included as part of the Windows XP installation procedure. 
Download and add it during the OS installation.

Creates a new disk when you create the initial virtual machine or template. Specify the 
amount of local storage to allocate to each user. Allow at least enough for the OS 
installation, patches, and locally installed applications. A best practice is to store as much of 
the user’s information, profile, and documents on network shares as possible, rather than 
locally. Doing so can greatly reduce the need for disk space and management of local data.

Installing Windows XP
Virtual machines behave like physical machines, so Windows XP installation is essentially the same on both. 
Although it is possible to image your virtual machine using some type of cloning technology, this guide focuses 
on a fresh Windows XP installation.

Preparation
LSI storage controller drivers are not available on the Windows XP installation CD, so be sure to complete the 
following tasks before starting the installation:

1.  Download the LSI 53C1030 drivers from the LSI Web site.
2.  Using MagicISO or other third-party solutions, create an .flp image containing the LSI Logic drivers.
3.  Use SCP to transfer the floppy image to the virtual machine’s ESX/ESXi host. If you are using vCenter,  

you can use the vSphere Client to upload the file to the datastore.

4.  Be sure you have a Windows XP CD or ISO image that is accessible from the virtual machine.

Preinstallation Modifications to the Virtual Machine
Make the following modifications to the virtual machine hardware profile before starting the Windows XP installation:

1.  Using the vSphere Client, connect to vCenter.
2.  Locate the virtual machine you created earlier.
3.  Edit the following hardware settings:

a.  Ensure that there is a floppy drive present.
b.  Configure the floppy drive to connect at power on.
c. 

If using a floppy image, ensure that the device type is set to use a floppy image and is pointing  
to the LSI Driver image.

d.  Check that the CD/DVD drive is present and configured to connect at power on.
e.  Configure the CD/DVD device type to point to the Windows XP CD or ISO image.

W H I T E   P A P E R   /   3

Windows XP Deployment GuideInstallation
After you complete the preinstallation preparation and modifications, you can install Windows XP:

1. 
From the vSphere Client, connect to vCenter.
2.  Power on the virtual machine created earlier.
3.  Use the console to view the boot process and to send input to the virtual machine.
4.  As the Windows setup process begins, press F6 to add another SCSI driver. This lets you specify the  

LSI Logic driver on the floppy image.

The Windows setup process copies all the necessary files to the virtual disk. Complete the setup just as you would for 
any normal Windows XP installation. Because this image will be used as a template, however, it is a good idea to make 
the configuration as generic as possible. (For information on customization, see Creating a Guest Customization.)

After completing the Windows setup, perform the following tasks before you finalize the image. Some of these steps will 
vary from organization to organization, depending on your Windows imaging standards; some are optional. Many can 
be managed using a group policy (see Managing Virtual Desktops Using Common GPOs).

Recommended Steps

If SP2 has not been applied to the installation CD, install SP2 and the most recent Microsoft updates.
Install and configure the VMware Tools.
Install View Agent.
Install and configure any additional third-party or in-house applications needed.

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5.  Set the Windows screen saver to “blank.”
6.  Configure the default color setting for the Windows Remote Desktop Client Connection. By default, Windows 

 

XP uses 16-bit color for Remote Desktop. You can enable and manage 24-bit color centrally by using a 
group policy or by making the following registry change:
HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Terminal Server\
WinStations\RDP-Tcp  
Change the color depth to 4.

Optional Steps

1.  Disable any unused hardware, such as COM1 and COM2.
2.  Turn off theme enhancements.
3.  Adjust My Computer > Properties > Advanced tab > Performance section > Settings for best performance.
4.  Set the blank screen saver to Password protect on resume.
5.  Ensure that hardware acceleration is enabled. 

Start > Control Panel > Display > Settings tab > Advanced button > Troubleshooting tab

6.  Delete any hidden update uninstall folders in the C:\Windows directory. 

For example: $NtUninstallKB893756$

7.  Disable Indexing Services:  

Start > Control Panel > Add Remove Windows Components > Indexing Service 
Note: Indexing improves searches by cataloging files. For users who search a lot, indexing may be 
beneficial and should not be disabled.

8.  Disable indexing of the C: drive in Properties.
9.  Remove or minimize System Restore points:  

Start > Control Panel > System > System Restore

10.  Disable any unwanted services.
11.  Run Disk Cleanup: 

My Computer > C: drive in properties

12.  Run Disk Defrag: 

My Computer > C: properties > Tools

After the preparations and installation are complete, you can power off the virtual machine and get ready to 
enable it as a deployment template for other virtual desktops.

W H I T E   P A P E R   /   4

Windows XP Deployment GuideConverting a Virtual Machine to a Template
Templates standardize the creation of virtual desktops and reduce the risk of human error. Many organizations 
use separate templates for different types of users or workgroups, such as Finance, HR, and Sales, where each 
group typically uses a unique software or virtual hardware configuration. Templates help you automate and manage 
desktop provisioning.

•	Any virtual machine can be converted to a template: just connect to vCenter using the vSphere Client, locate 

the virtual machine in the inventory, and select Convert to Template.

•	Any virtual machine can also be cloned to a template. Cloning creates a copy of the virtual machine, leaving the 

original in place.

Cloning is helpful if you update the template and redeploy desktops often—for instance, if you deploy nonpersistent 
desktops or if you use a profile solution to separate the user profiles from the desktop environment. Cloning enables 
you to convert a template to a virtual machine, update it, and then convert it back to a template at any time.

Creating a Guest Customization
Guest customization enables you to customize virtual desktops as they are created. Using Microsoft Sysprep, 
vCenter guest customization automates configuration tasks such as the following:

•	Adding registration information
•	Assigning a unique computer name
•	Adding your product key
•	Setting the administrator password
•	Setting the time zone
•	Adding any custom run-once scripts
•	Defining the network configuration
•	Joining a domain
•	Generating a new SID

VMware View works with any existing predefined guest customization specification. You can select which guest 
customization file to use, if any, to customize the pool of virtual desktops.

To create a guest customization specification, follow these steps:

1.  Connect with vCenter using the vSphere Client.
2.  Select Edit > Customization Specifications.
3.  When the Customization Specification Manager starts, select New.

If you prefer, you can import an existing custom sysprep.ini file and use it in the Guest Customization 
wizard. As a best practice when using View and a guest customization specification, set the Computer Name 
portion of the guest specification to Use the Virtual Machine Name. This ensures that the computer name is 
consistent across View, vCenter, Active Directory, and Local Computer Name.

When your initial virtual machine, template, and guest customization are complete, the virtual desktop template is 
ready, and you can use it when deploying virtual desktops.

Managing Windows XP View Desktops
The following sections focus on best practices for simplifying and standardizing some common desktop 
management tasks.

Adding Users to the Local Remote Desktop Users Group
You need to add users to the Windows XP local group Remote Desktop Users, so that they will be able to 
access individual or pooled desktops. There are several ways to add users or groups to the local Remote 
Desktop Users group. One approach is to use a login script. Another approach leverages the Restricted 
Groups GPO in Active Directory.

W H I T E   P A P E R   /   5

Windows XP Deployment GuideWhen leveraging Restricted Groups, you can add users individually, or you can create a group, add users to it, 
and then add that group to the Restricted Group you are managing. Here are the steps for configuring a 
Restricted Group using the Default Domain Policy:

1.  Using your Microsoft Management Console (MMC) with the Group Policy console for your domain, create 

a new group called View Users under Active Directory > Users and Computers.

2.  Add users to this group who need to access the virtual desktops.
3.  Edit your Default Domain Policy.
4.  Under Computer Configuration > Windows Settings > Restricted Groups, add the Remote Desktop 

Users Group.

5.  Add the View Users group to the Restricted Remote Desktop Users group.

This approach ensures that the View Users group is always added to the local Remote Desktop Users group of 
each virtual desktop joined to the domain. When provisioning new users, an administrator or helpdesk technician 
must only ensure that users are added to the View Users group in Active Directory.

Managing Virtual Desktops Using Common GPOs
There are several Group Policy objects (GPOs) that can be used for central control of the configuration of your 
virtual desktops. Because users access their virtual desktops with Remote Desktop, the most commonly used 
GPOs are the Terminal Server GPOs under Computer or User Configuration > Administrative Templates > 
Windows Components > Terminal Services. Several of the GPOs are specific to Terminal Server and do not 
apply to Remote Desktop sessions. Some of the commonly used GPOs for deploying Windows XP in a View 
environment are described in Table 2 and Table 3. Many of these GPOs are optional but recommended. Naturally,  
use cases and environments vary depending on your organization’s standards and policies.

Table 2. GPOs Under Terminal Services

serVIC e

Des CrIPtIon

Enforce removal of Remote Desktop 
wallpaper = Enable

This setting can greatly enhance the user experience, especially over low-
bandwidth connections.

Limit maximum color depth = Enable

This setting lets you set the color depth for Remote Desktop sessions.

Allow users to connect remotely 
using Terminal Services = Enable

This setting ensures that the local policy enabling Remote Desktop 
connections is configured.

Remote Windows security item from 
Start Menu = Disable

The Disable setting ensures that users have a logout mechanism.

Remove Disconnect option from Shut 
down dialog = Enable

This setting minimizes the possibility of users disconnecting rather than 
logging out.

I/O adapters

The LSI Logic adapter issued for deployments based on View is recommended; 
however, the LSI Logic driver is not included as part of the Windows XP 
installation procedure. Download and add it during the OS installation.

W H I T E   P A P E R   /   6

Windows XP Deployment GuideTable 3. GPOs Under Terminal Services > Sessions

serVIC e

Des CrIPtIon

Set time limit for disconnected 
sessions = Enable

Set a time limit for active but idle 
Terminal Services sessions = Enable

This setting logs out any disconnected sessions that occur after the 
specified time. Combined with View virtual machine power policies, this 
setting can be used to create a dynamic and powerful solution for 
suspending or powering off disconnected virtual desktops. When unneeded 
desktops are suspended or powered off, the resources are made available to 
other desktops.

This setting logs out any idle sessions that occur after the specified time. 
Combined with View virtual machine power policies, this setting can be used 
to create a dynamic and powerful solution for suspending or powering off 
disconnected virtual desktops. When unneeded desktops are suspended or 
powered off, the resources are made available to other desktops.

Note: A Windows XP bug may prevent the idle tracker from working. A hotfix is available from Microsoft upon request. See KB890864.

Managing the View Client Using GPOs
One of the components provided with VMware View is the View Client, an application that is installed on the client 
and which provides the client-side component for connecting with virtual desktops. On some clients, the View 
Client also enables the ability to redirect additional USB devices not supported by native RDP device redirection.

Also included with View is a Group Policy Administrative Template for managing and configuring View Client 
settings from a central location with Group Policy. Using this administrative template, you can manage the 
following client-side settings:

•	Enable the shade
•	Pin the shade
•	Don’t check monitor alignment on spanning
•	Color depth
•	Desktop background
•	Show contents of window while dragging
•	Menu and window animation
•	Themes
•	Cursor shadow
•	Font smoothing
•	Desktop composition
•	Audio redirection
•	Redirect drives
•	Redirect printers
•	Redirect serial ports
•	Redirect smart cards
•	Redirect clipboard
•	Redirect supported plug-and-play devices
•	Bitmap caching
•	Shadow bitmaps
•	Cache persistence active
•	Enable compression
•	Windows key combination redirection
•	Bitmap cache file size

W H I T E   P A P E R   /   7

Windows XP Deployment GuideTake the following steps to start configuring the View Client settings:

1. 

Locate the vdm_client.adm file in <install_directory>\VMware\VMware View\Server\extras\
GroupPolicyFiles. This file is located on any View Connection Server that has been installed.

2.  Copy this file to the management station you use to manage GPOs. By default, Group Policy looks for 

administration templates in C:\WINDOWS\inf. You can copy the vdm_client.adm file to that location 
or any other location accessible from your management station.

3.  Using your Microsoft Management Console (MMC) with the Group Policy Editor snap-in loaded, locate 

the group policy you want to add the template to.

4.  From the policy, expand User Configuration, select Administrative Templates, and select Add/

Remove Templates.

5.  Locate the vdm_client template and add it to the policy.

When you complete these steps, you are ready to configure your policy to manage View Client settings. When managing 
the View Client settings for another device, such as a thin client using its own RDP client and configuration, any GPO 
settings for Remote Desktop will override the client side. For example, if the client is configured to use 24-bit color and 
the Remote Desktop GPO is configured for a maximum of 16-bit color, the connection will connect using 16-bit color.

Supporting Multiple Monitors
If you use the Microsoft Remote Desktop client command-line option /span, a Remote Desktop session can 
span multiple displays with a maximum resolution of 4096 x 2048. However, spanning does not create a desktop 
experience identical to that of a workstation with a multiport graphics card. To achieve a true multimonitor 
experience, you need a third-party tool, such as SplitView or iShadow Desktop.

VMware View also enables users to configure their desktops by spanning the Remote Desktop session across multiple 
monitors. Individual users can configure this preference with the View Client or View Web Access.

About the Author
Warren Ponder, Director of Product Management, Enterprise Desktop, End User Computing, VMware, wrote this 
paper while in the role of Senior Technical Marketing Engineer.

Release Notes
Tina de Benedictis, Technical Marketing Manager, Enterprise Desktop, End User Computing, VMware, made 
minor updates to this paper. The paper does not fully reflect the current capabilities of View with PCoIP.

References
http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/default.aspx

http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/windowsxp/default.aspx?wt.svl=leftnav

http://technet2.microsoft.com/windowsserver/en/library/b9546edf-751f-4a09-835a-f3397caef2361033.
mspx?mfr=true

http://technet2.microsoft.com/windowsserver2008/en/library/fc0b405b-07ef-4767-8716-198d7f0949011033.
mspx?mfr=true

http://www.ishadow.com/

http://www.splitview.com/

W H I T E   P A P E R   /   8

Windows XP Deployment GuideVMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com
Copyright © 2012 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed 
at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be 
trademarks of their respective companies. Item No: VMW-WP-WINDOWS-XP-DEPLOYMENT-GUIDE-USLET-104-20120709-WEB

Windows XP Deployment Guide