F R E Q U E N T L Y   A S K E D   Q U E S T I O N S

VMware vSphere® Flash Read Cache® 1.0

VMware vSphere  
Flash Read Cache

Host Configuration
Q1.  What are the minimum and maximum numbers of hosts 

required for VMware vSphere® Flash Read Cache®?

A1.   A minimum of 1 and a maximum of 32 hosts per cluster.

Q2.   What is vSphere Flash Read Cache VFFS?
A2.   VFFS is a logical container used by the VMware vSphere 
platform to group and manage local Flash devices into a 
single resource.

Q3.  

Is there a way to configure the VFFS for multiple  
VMware ESXi™ hosts simultaneously?

A3.   Yes. The VFFS can be configured in batch mode from the 

VMware vSphere Web Client.

Q4.  

Is it possible to configure multiple VFFS logical  
containers per ESXi hosts?

A4.   No. You can have only one VFFS logical container per  

ESXi host.

Q5.  

Is it possible to utilize the VFFS for ESXi host  
memory swap?

A5.   Yes. vSphere Flash Read Cache offers legacy support for 

the swap-to-SSD feature introduced in vSphere 5.0.

Q6.   To use vSphere Flash Read Cache, which version of 

vSphere is required? 

A6.   vSphere 5.5 or later.

Q7.   Will vSphere Flash Read Cache be backward  

compatible with vSphere 5.1?

A7.   No. vSphere Flash Read Cache is compatible with only 

vSphere 5.5 and later.

Disk Configuration
Q8.   What types of storage device interface are supported 

for vSphere Flash Read Cache?

A8.   SATA, SAS and PCI Express.

Q9.   What is the maximum number of Flash devices that can 

be used per ESXi host for vSphere Flash Read Cache?
A9.   A maximum of eight Flash-based devices per ESXi host.

Q10.   What is the maximum Virtual Flash Host Swap Cache 

supported by ESXi hosts?

A10.   The maximum supported is 4TB per ESXi host.

Q11.   What is the maximum virtual machine Virtual Flash Read 

Cache working set supported per virtual machine disk 
format (VMDK)?

A11.   The default Virtual Flash Read Cache configurable 

maximum size is 200GB, but a 400GB total maximum  
is supported.

Q12.   How can the total supported Virtual Flash Read Cache  

be configured?

A12.   To use a 400GB cache working set, the host’s  

advanced settings values require the modification of  
VFLASH.MaxCacheFileSizeMB to 409600 and  
VFLASH.MaxDiskFileSizeGB to 16384.

Q13.   What are the block-size settings supported by  

Virtual Flash Read Cache?

A13.   The minimum supported block size is 1KB; the maximum 

supported block size is 1,024KB.

Q14.   Is it possible to configure Virtual Flash Read Cache at 

the virtual machine level?

A14.   No. The Virtual Flash Read Cache is granularly allocated on 

a per-VMDK basis.

Q15.   Can vSphere Flash Read Cache be used with remote 

Flash devices?

A15.   No. vSphere Flash Read Cache works with only local  

Flash devices.

Q16.   Does vSphere Flash Read Cache provide write-back and 

write-through cache modes?

A16.   No. The 1.0 version of vSphere Flash Read Cache supports 

only write-through mode (read only).

F A Q   /   1

VMware vSphere Flash Read Cache 1.0

Q17.   Which types of vSphere datastores are supported for 

Q26.  Can VMware vSphere Fault Tolerance (vSphere FT) 

virtual machines using Virtual Flash Read Cache?

enabled virtual machines use Virtual Flash Read Cache?

A17.   VMware vSphere VMFS; Network File System (NFS);  

A26.   No. vSphere FT enabled virtual machines are  

Raw-device mapping (RDM).

not supported.

Q18.   Does vSphere Flash Read Cache support the use of 

physical RDMs?

A18.   No. vSphere Flash Read Cache supports the use of only 

virtual RDMs.

Virtual Machine Configuration
Q19.   What are the virtual machine requirements for using 

Virtual Flash Read Cache?

A19.   The virtual machine hardware version must be upgraded 

to version 10 (VMX-10) and the vSphere Web Client  
for management.

Q20.  Can the vSphere C# client be used to manage and 

configure Virtual Flash Read Cache?

A20.   No. To configure and manage any of the features and 

components of Virtual Flash Read Cache, the  
vSphere Web Client must be used.

Q21.   To use Virtual Flash Read Cache, what virtual machine 

agents are required?

A21.   None. Virtual Flash Read Cache is an agentless solution 

and is completely transparent to virtual machines and 
guest operating system (OS).

Q22.  Do adding and removing Virtual Flash Read Cache 
settings from a virtual machine require a shutdown?
A22.   No. The Virtual Flash Read Cache working set can be 

added, removed and modified dynamically without having 
to shut down virtual machines.

Q23.  What happens to a virtual machine’s cache contents 

when the settings are modified?

A23.   Increasing, reducing or modifying the virtual machine’s 
Virtual Flash Read Cache settings will result in the cache 
contents’ being discarded.

Q24.  Can Virtual Flash Read Cache settings be configured for 

multiple virtual machines simultaneously from the 
vSphere Web Client?

A24.   No, not currently. Configuring multiple virtual machines 
simultaneously can be achieved via one of our scripting 
solutions, such as VMware vSphere PowerCLI™.

Q25.  Does Virtual Flash Read Cache enhance the  

performance of all virtual machine applications after it 
has been configured?

A25.   No. vSphere Flash Read Cache is designed to enhance the 
performance of applications that have I/O patterns based 
on read-intensive operations. 

Virtual Flash Resource Management
Q27.   What is the maximum number of Flash devices  

supported per VFFS?

A27.   A maximum of eight Flash devices is supported.

Q28.  What is the maximum capacity supported for the VFFS 

per host?

A28.   A maximum capacity of 32TB per VFFS.

Q29.  What is the maximum capacity supported per  

Flash device?

A29.   A maximum of 4TB is supported per Flash device.

Q30.  How can the resource utilization of the VFFS pool be 

monitored and tracked?

A30.   The VFFS utilization metrics are displayed on a per-host 

basis under the Virtual Flash settings and at the  
cluster level as part of the cluster resources under the 
summary tab.

Q31.   Can the VFFS be used to store virtual machines?
A31.   No. The VFFS is a caching layer—not a storage device that 

can be used to store virtual machines. It is not visible in  
the UI.

Q32.  Can the VFFS or a Flash device be shared between 

VSAN and vSphere Flash Read Cache?

A32.   No. Flash devices cannot be shared between VSAN and 

vSphere Flash Read Cache. Each requires its own exclusive 
and dedicated Flash device.

Q33.  Can the VFFS be used to provide resources simultane-

ously to ESXi hosts as well as to virtual machines?

A33.   Yes. After the VFFS has been created, the total available 

capacity can be used and consumed by both ESXi hosts as 
Virtual Flash Host Swap Cache and virtual machines as 
Virtual Flash Read Cache.

Q34.  Is it possible to manually assign dedicated Flash devices 

to individual VMDKs?

A34.  No. The VFFS combines all Flash devices into one entity, 
and it is not possible to pick and choose individual Flash 
devices.

Q35.  Does the VFFS leverage shares to manage resource 

contention?

A35.   No. The allocation of Virtual Flash Read Cache is treated  

as a reservation, so there aren’t any issues with  
resource contention.

F A Q   /   2

Q36.  Does the VFFS provide support for expandable  

reservation?

A36.   No. There is no support for expandable reservations.

Q37.   Does the VFFS support thin provisioning?
A37.   No. There is no support for thin provisioning  

or oversubscription.

Interoperability
Q38.  Is vSphere Flash Read Cache compatible with  

VMware vSphere vMotion®?

A38.   Yes. The vSphere vMotion workflow has been modified to 

include two new migration settings for cache contents:
•	 Always	migrate	the	cache	contents	(copy)
•	 Do	not	migrate	the	cache	contents	(drop)

	
	

Q39.  The VFFS is a nonshared local resource container. How 

can vSphere vMotion work?

A39.   VFFS is compatible with vSphere vMotion, svMotion and 
XvMotion. vSphere vMotion migrations are automatically 
converted into an XvMotion operation in this case.

Q40.  What is the impact of migrating the virtual machine 

cache contents?

A40.  Depending on the size of the cache contents, the migration 

operation can take longer than usual to complete, but the 
virtual machine maintains the cache contents.

Q41.   What happens if the cache contents are discarded as 

part of the migration operation?

A41.   The migration operation will complete much faster, but the 

data must be recached on the target host after the 
migration has been completed.

Q42.  How does VMware vSphere Distributed Resource 

Scheduler™ (vSphere DRS) handle migrations of virtual 
machines with Virtual Flash Read Cache?

A42.   vSphere DRS doesn’t automatically migrate virtual 

machines with Virtual Flash Read Cache as part of its load 
balancing operations, except when a host is placed in 
maintenance mode or during major overutilization 
contention events.

Q43.  Can the VFFS be managed at a cluster level?
A43.   No. The VFFS is managed at the host level only. During 

virtual machine power-on, vSphere DRS makes initial 
placement based on the available VFFS on each host at the 
cluster level.

Q44.  Are the Virtual Flash Read Cache contents replicated to 

other hosts with a VFFS?

A44.   No. There is no replication on cache contents across hosts 

in a cluster.

VMware vSphere Flash Read Cache 1.0

Q45.  How does VMware vSphere High Availability  

(vSphere HA) handle a virtual machine failure event? 
A45.   If a virtual machine crashes, vSphere HA will restart the 

virtual machine on the same hosts, and cache contents will 
be rebuilt.

Q46.  If a virtual machine I/O pattern changes, will the  
Virtual Flash Read Cache be dynamically updated?
A46.   No. In version 1.0, the allocation of Virtual Flash Read 

Cache is treated as a reservation, which also represents the 
limit. It is not automatically increased or decreased by  
the system.

Q47.   What functional operations will preserve the cache 

contents of a virtual machine?

A47.   Operations such as snapshot, cloning, migrations, and fast 

suspend/resume will preserve cache contents.

Q48.  What functional operations will discard the cache 

contents of a virtual machine?

A48.   Operations such as suspend, resize, change, delete, modify, 
virtual machine restarts, host restart, and restore snapshot 
will discard cache contents.

Q49.  When using vSphere Flash Read Cache in a vSphere DRS 

or vSphere HA enabled cluster, is it required that all 
hosts have VFFS?

A49.   No. vSphere Flash Read Cache does not have to be 

enabled for every host in a cluster, but it is recommended.

Q50.  Is it possible to migrate Virtual Flash Read Cache 

enabled virtual machines onto hosts without a VFFS?

A50.   No. The VMware® vCenter Server™ compatibility resource 
and compatibility checkpoints will prevent the migration 
from occurring.

Q51.   Because the Virtual Flash Read Cache settings for virtual 

machines are based on reservations, when is the 
working set capacity actually consumed?

A51.   The VFFS capacity is consumed by virtual machines only 
when they are powered on and when migrated to another 
host. When the virtual machines are powered off, the 
allocated capacity is put back into the VFFS pool. 

Q52.  Do capacity allocation and consumption for Virtual Flash 

Host Swap Cache work the same way as for virtual 
machines?

A52.   No. The Virtual Flash Host Swap Cache capacity is 

consumed immediately. It is never given back to the VFFS 
regardless of the power state of the host.

F A Q   /   3

VMware vSphere Flash Read Cache 1.0

Q53.  Does vSphere Flash Read Cache provide some capability 

Q61.   Is there any intelligence applied to the data  

for selecting what data to cache?

eviction process?

A53.   No. vSphere Flash Read Cache does not use any 

A61.   vSphere Flash Read Cache adapts data usage information 

obtained by detecting cache hits to previously cached 
data. It then determines which data should be retained or 
evicted, based on least impact to the virtual machines and 
to application performance.

Q62.  Can vCenter Server monitor the use of vSphere  

Flash Read Cache?

A62.   Yes. There are three new performance statistics counters 

included that monitor the use of vSphere Flash Read Cache 
enabled virtual machines.

Q63.  What are the names of the vSphere Flash Read Cache 

related performance statistics counters, and what types 
of statistics do they provide?

A63.   The following are the performance statistics counters:
	

I/Os per second to the virtual disk cache.

•	 vFlashCacheIops	–	Monitors	the	average	number	of	 
 
•	 vFlashCacheLatency	–	Monitors	the	average	number	of			
  microseconds to complete I/O to the virtual disk cache.
•	 vFlashCacheThroughput	–	Monitors	the	average	of		
 
cache currently being controlled by the VFC module.

	

application or guest-level intelligence to selectively choose 
what data must be cached. It caches all data, based on I/O 
heuristics maintained by vSphere Flash Read Cache.

Device Failures and Failure Scenarios 
Q54.  What is the impact to a virtual machine when the  

Flash device storing its cache contents fails?

A54.   The virtual machine will suffer a performance hit because 
its cache contents will not be available and all I/O will go 
directly to the VMDKs.

Q55.  Will the failure of a Flash device storing cache contents 

cause virtual machine outages?

A55.   No. Virtual machines will continue to operate without their 

cache contents, but performance will be impacted.

Q56.  What happens when the VFFS capacity is completely 

utilized?

A56.   It will not be possible to assign or reserve any more  

Virtual Flash Read Cache resources to new virtual 
machines.

Q57.   What happens to a vSphere Flash Read Cache enabled 

virtual machine that is failed over to another host via 
vSphere HA when the VFFS on the target host is full?

A57.   The virtual machine will fail to power on, due to the lack of 

spare capacity.

Q58.  Will disabling vSphere HA admission control allow 

virtual machines to power on if there is a failover event 
for which the receiving hosts cannot satisfy the  
vSphere Flash Read Cache reservations?

A58.   No. The virtual machines will fail to power on. The 

resources provided by vSphere Flash Read Cache are  
not taken into account by vSphere HA admission  
control operations.

Q59.  What happens when the Flash device’s cache capacity  

is full?

	

	

Q64.  Does vSphere Flash Read Cache provide any CLI-based 

monitoring solutions?

A64.   Yes. The cache performance statistics can be retrieved in 
greater detail by using the new vSphere Flash Read Cache 
ESXCLI namespace.

Q65.  What is the performance statistics syntax for the 

vSphere Flash Read Cache ESXCLI namespace?

A65.		 esxcli	storage	vflash	cache	stats	get	–m	<module>	-c		

<cache	file	name>.

Q66.  Where are the vSphere Flash Read Cache files located?
A66.   The vSphere Flash Read Cache files are located on the 

ESXi host under the /vmfs/volumes/vffs/vflash.

Hardware
Q67.   What Flash devices are recommended for  

A59.   There is a threshold mechanism that is set to 90 percent  

vSphere Flash Read Cache?

of utilization. When the cache fill percentage reaches 
threshold, the eviction process is triggered.

Q60.  What happens with the cache contents when the 

eviction process is triggered?

A60.   Cache contents will start evicting pages, based on the 

usage history.

A67.   Currently the VMware Compatibility Guide has a list of 

officially supported devices from Dell, Intel and Samsung. 
Visit the VMware compatibility site for the latest 
information on supported devices.

http://www.vmware.com/resources/compatibility/search.
php?deviceCategory=vfrc

F A Q   /   4

VMware vSphere Flash Read Cache 1.0

About the Author

Rawlinson is a senior architect working for the Cloud Infrastructure Technical Marketing organization at VMware. His focus is on 
software-defined storage technologies and OpenStack framework integration with VMware products and solutions. Previously he was 
an architect in the VMware Cloud Infrastructure and Management Professional Services organization, focused on vSphere and cloud 
enterprise architectures for VMware Fortune 100 and 500 customers. Rawlinson is among the first VMware Certified Design Experts 
and the author of multiple books based on VMware and other technologies.

•		Follow	Rawlinson’s	blogs:

	

	

•	 http://blogs.vmware.com/vsphere/storage 

•	 http://www.punchingclouds.com

•		Follow	Rawlinson	on	Twitter:	

	

•	 @PunchingClouds

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com
Copyright © 2013 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed 
at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be 
trademarks of their respective companies. Item No: VMW-FAQ-VFRC-USLET-1011 
Docsouce: OIC-13VM005.04

