Software-Defined,  
Hyper-Converged VDI 
Solutions Brief

The Virtual Desktop Opportunity

 

Virtual desktop infrastructure (VDI) can yield security, manageability, and productivity benefits. 
In fact it’s estimated that with VDI, help desk costs can be reduced by up to 66%, and IT labor 
costs by as much as 74% . That’s in addition to the security benefits achieved through the 
centralization of intellectual property. To realize these benefits, it’s important that VDI be 
architected and implemented properly. Historically, one of the architectural (and cost) challenges 
of correct implementation has been storage. This challenge was further compounded due 
to the separation of compute from the storage environment. Externally shared data storage 
systems supply applications with capacity, performance, and data protection, but their limited 
automation and inability to adapt in real time to dynamic changes can cause problems with VDI. 

Converged and Hyper-Converged Systems to the Rescue
IT departments have tried to resolve the problems caused by this separation by seeking out 
appliances that combine servers and storage. But when a converged appliance reaches capacity, 
companies have to buy additional units, which ends up creating separate storage elements. 
To solve storage challenges in a scalable way, organizations need hyper-convergence: unified 
appliances containing compute, storage, and networking resources that leverage storage across 
an enterprise in one or more software-defined pools. When built with file-sharing services, these 
pools can be of any size, located across any number of resources, providing complete scalability 
and flexibility for the organization.

Better Together: VMware Horizon with View on EVO: RAIL  
with NexentaConnect
VMware enables easy-to-implement VDI with VMware Horizon® with View, which delivers 
virtualized and remote desktops and applications through a single platform and supports end 
users with access to all their desktop and online resources through one unified workspace. Now 
Horizon runs on VMware EVO: RAIL™, a hyper-converged infrastructure appliance that combines 
VMware compute, networking, and storage resources into a simple, easy-to-deploy, all-in-one 
solution offered by VMware partners.

Both Horizon and EVO: RAIL leverage VMware Virtual SAN™ (VSAN) technology, which 
automates storage provisioning and leverages direct attached storage resources to drive 
down storage costs for desktop workloads. NexentaConnect for VMware Virtual SAN and 

Visit us online at nexenta.com

Combined  
Key Benefits
•  300% capacity improvement 

with compression

•  80% improved storage capacity 

for linked clones

•  23% improved storage capacity 

utilization for full clones

•  Hyper-converged system for VDI 

based on VMware EVO: RAIL 
that is easy to deploy and simple 
to manage and scale

•  Complete solution for VDI based 

on market-leading VMware 
Horizon 6

•  Integrated scale-out file services 

with NexentaConnect for user 
data and profiles with no 
additional hardware required

NexentaConnect for VMware Horizon complement these VMware 
solutions by providing file services that make it easy to share files across 
storage pools and users, for maximum seamless scalability. 

About EVO: RAIL

Horizon 6

EN

GINE

AIL

EVO: R
Virtual SA
vSphere
EVO: R

CPU

CPU

N
CPU

CPU

CPU

CPU

CPU

CPU

AIL

About VMware Horizon

Horizon 6 allows IT to centrally manage virtual, physical, and BYO 
Windows images to streamline management, reduce costs, and maintain 
compliance. With Horizon 6, virtualized or remoted desktops and 
applications can be delivered through a single platform to end users. 
These desktop and application services—including RDSH-hosted apps, 
VMware ThinApp® packaged apps, SaaS apps, and even virtualized apps 
from Citrix—can all be accessed from one unified workspace to provide 
end users with all of the resources they want, at the speed they expect, 
with the efficiency business demands. 

Deliver virtual or remoted desktops and applications through a single 
platform to streamline management, easily entitle end users, and quickly 
deliver Windows desktops and applications to end users across devices 
and locations. Horizon 6 now supports a single platform for delivering 
hosted Windows applications and shared desktop sessions from 
Windows Server instances using Microsoft Remote Desktop Services 
(RDS), virtual desktops, and VMware App Volumes™ containerized 
applications. 

VMware EVO: RAIL combines compute, networking, and storage 
resources into a hyper-converged infrastructure appliance to create a 
simple, easy-to-deploy, all-in-one solution offered by VMware qualified 
partners. EVO: RAIL provides several key benefits:

Simplicity Transformed – EVO: RAIL enables power-on to VM creation 
in minutes, radically easy VM deployment, one-click, non-disruptive 
patches and upgrades, simplified management, and more.

Software-Defined Building Block – EVO: RAIL is a scalable,  
Software-Defined Data Center (SDDC) building block that delivers 
compute, networking, storage, and management to empower private 
and hybrid cloud, end-user computing, test and dev, and branch office 
environments.

Trusted Foundation – Building on the proven technology of VMware 
vSphere®, VMware vCenter Server™, and VMware Virtual SAN,  
EVO: RAIL delivers the first hyper-converged infrastructure appliance 
100% powered by VMware software.

Highly Resilient by Design – Resilient appliance design starting with 
four independent hosts and a distributed Virtual SAN datastore ensures 
zero application downtime during planned maintenance or during disk, 
network, or host failures.

Infrastructure at the Speed of Innovation – Meet accelerating 
business demands by simplifying infrastructure design with predictable 
sizing and scaling, by streamlining purchase and deployment with a 
single appliance SKU, and by reducing CapEx and OpEx.

Freedom of Choice – EVO: RAIL is delivered as a complete appliance 
solution with hardware, software, and support through leading systems 
vendors; customers choose their preferred brand.

About NexentaConnect 

NexentaConnect is a complete suite of software solutions to combine 
software-defined storage with cloud, enterprise, and desktop 
deployments. The suite provides acceleration, automation, and 
analytics that can only be delivered when storage is integrated with 
the entire solution stack. NexentaConnect for VMware Virtual SAN 
provides file services for VMware Virtual SAN environments, adding 
NFS and SMB access on top of existing Virtual SAN to complete the 
software hyper-convergence model. NexentaConnect for Virtual SAN 
features complete vCenter–integrated, wizard-driven automation and 
powerful I/O acceleration for file storage options.

Deeply integrated into the VMware fabric, NexentaConnect solutions 
support scale-out functions including full NFS file services, lowering 
overall cost of storage by 10–15% at a minimum through management 
and infrastructure simplification with no performance or scale 
compromises. Some of the key metrics seen by users deploying 
NexentaConnect in an EVO: RAIL with Horizon with View are:

•  23% improved storage capacity utilization for full clones 
•  80% improved storage capacity for linked clones
•  Over 300% capacity improvement with compression
•  Up to 66% physical space savings – No need to add another 4U NAS 

(6U total compared to 2U)

•  No extra power, cooling, or capital purchase needed
•  Fully hyper-converged VDI with file services included

Deploying VMware Horizon  
with View on EVO: RAIL with  
NexentaConnect

The goal of hyper-converged solutions is to provide simplicity alongside 
performance. Deployment of the VDI solution based on EVO: RAIL 
and NexentaConnect is no exception. Beginning with the initial user 
configuration of the Marvin interface to configure networking and user 
parameters, EVO: RAIL can be deployed in under 15 minutes.  

This deployment includes the configuration and installation of the 
VMware Virtual SAN architecture along with the vCenter Web Client. 
To add the needed file services to the EVO: RAIL solution, or any 
Virtual SAN deployment, you simply install the NexentaConnect Web 
Client Plugin and corresponding .ovf file. File services are now available 
with the total deployment in less than 30 minutes. The final piece of 
the puzzle is to configure and deploy the View Connection Server and 
needed components. Again, based on simplicity, the View Connection 
Server is deployed as a single Windows server within the EVO: RAIL 
environment, residing on the Virtual SAN. Following the well-known 
Windows installer process, the only steps left are deploying the 
desktops. Desktop deployment then utilizes the Virtual SAN storage 
profiles for image storage and the NexentaConnect–provided SMB 
shares for user profiles and data. Full integration with Active Directory 
allows for self-service profile and data restores from within the 
Windows management consoles. 

For more information about this state-of-the-art, hyper-converged 
solution to the challenges of VDI, visit the Nexenta Web site at  
http://www.nexenta.com/products/nexentaconnect/ or the VMware 
Web site at http://www.vmware.com/products/horizon-view/ and 
http://www.vmware.com/products/evorail.

EVO: RAIL

System

Nexenta
Connect
Install

VMware
Horizon
Install

Deploy

Desktop and

Apps

NexentaConnect for VMware Virtual SAN is VMware Ready, designating the highest level of VMware 
endorsement for products and solutions created by its established partners.

Nexenta Systems, Inc. 451 El Camino Real, Unit 201, Santa Clara, CA 95050  
Toll free: + 1-855-639-3682  |   EMEA: +31-36-3030700  |  sales@nexenta.com 
nexenta.com  |  facebook.com/nexenta  |  twitter.com/nexenta

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue, Palo Alto, CA 94304 USA 
Tel: 877-486-9273  |  Fax: 650-427-5001  |  www.vmware.com 

© 2015 Nexenta Systems, Inc. Nexenta is a registered trademark of Nexenta Systems Inc., in the United States and other countries. All other trademarks,  
service marks and company names mentioned in this document are properties of their respective owners. Notice: This document is for informational purposes only,  
and does not set forth any warranty, expressed or implied, concerning any equipment or service offered or to be offered by Nexenta Systems, Inc.

20150129

Copyright © 2015 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are  
covered by one or more patents listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States  
and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. 

