	  	  

Hardened Virtual Appliance 
Operations Guide 

Securing the Appliance Base Platform to Meet High Governance 
Requirements 

V M W A R E   W H I T E P A P E R  

 

 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 

Introduction ......................................................................................... 3	  
Purpose .............................................................................................. 4	  
Root password .................................................................................... 4	  
Password Expiry ................................................................................. 5	  
Dodscript.sh Script .............................................................................. 6	  
Secure Shell, Administrative Accounts, and Console Access ............ 8	  
Time Sourcing and Synchronization ................................................. 10	  
Log Forwarding – Syslog-ng and Auditd ........................................... 12	  
Boot Loader (Grub) Password .......................................................... 15	  
NFS and NIS ..................................................................................... 16	  

 

 
 

 

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com 
Copyright © 2010 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. 
VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. 

 

 

Introduction 
 
 
The	  virtual	  appliance	  method	  of	  deployment	  for	  VMware	  datacenter	  products	  provides	  
customers	  with	  the	  ability	  to	  rapidly	  deploy	  and	  configure	  infrastructure	  components.	  	  
One	  of	  the	  original	  challenges	  with	  the	  virtual	  appliance	  model	  was	  the	  lack	  of	  a	  
standardized	  security	  policy	  across	  the	  released	  product	  landscape.	  	  In	  2013,	  a	  
development	  effort	  was	  launched	  to	  standardize	  the	  security	  profile	  of	  VMware	  
produced	  virtual	  appliances	  to	  a	  technical	  standard	  that	  would	  meet	  or	  exceed	  current	  
high-­‐governance	  compliance	  requirements	  found	  in	  various	  vertical	  market	  segments:	  
	  

•  US	  Department	  of	  Defense	  (DoD)	  Information	  Assurance	  Certification	  and	  

Accreditation	  Process	  (DIACAP)	  

•  Director	  of	  Central	  Intelligence	  Directive	  (DCID)	  6/3	  for	  US	  Intelligence	  Agencies	  
•  FedRAMP	  
•  HIPAA	  
•  PCI-­‐DSS	  

	  
The	  two	  most	  common	  references	  for	  implementing	  technical	  security	  requirements	  are	  
the	  NIST	  800.53	  and	  the	  US	  Department	  of	  Defense	  Information	  Systems	  Agency	  (DISA)	  
Security	  Technical	  Information	  Guides	  (STIG).	  	  The	  latest	  iteration	  of	  the	  STIG,	  called	  the	  
Security	  Requirements	  Guide	  (SRG),	  is	  an	  effort	  by	  DISA	  to	  merge	  both	  the	  NIST	  800.53	  
and	  the	  STIG	  guidance	  into	  a	  single	  security	  guide	  that	  cross-­‐references	  both	  sets	  of	  
technical	  requirements.	  	  In	  2013	  VMware	  commenced	  the	  process	  of	  the	  production	  of	  
the	  VMware	  Virtual	  Appliance	  OS	  SRG	  STIG,	  to	  provide	  customers	  with	  the	  guidance	  
necessary	  to	  meet	  or	  exceed	  any	  high-­‐governance	  compliance	  requirement.	  
	  
In	  parallel,	  VMware	  began	  an	  effort	  to	  standardize	  the	  delivery	  of	  the	  virtual	  appliance	  
platform	  by	  embedding	  the	  technical	  requirements	  of	  the	  STIG	  in	  the	  design.	  	  The	  end	  
result	  in	  2013	  is	  the	  release	  of	  14	  hardened	  virtual	  appliances	  across	  9	  products	  that	  
close	  91-­‐95%	  of	  the	  identified	  platform	  vulnerabilities	  in	  code:	  
	  

•  vCenter	  Server	  Virtual	  Appliance	  5.5	  (VCVA)	  
•  vCenter	  Orchestrator	  5.5	  (vCOva)	  
•  vCenter	  Operations	  Manager	  5.7.1	  (vCOPs)	  
•  vCenter	  Infrastructure	  Navigator	  2.0	  (VIN)	  
•  vCloud	  Automation	  Center	  Virtual	  Appliance	  6.0	  (vCACva)	  
•  vCenter	  Management	  Assistant	  (vMA)	  
•  VMware	  Log	  Insight	  1.0	  
•  Horizon	  Workspace	  Manager	  1.5	  

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com 
Copyright © 2010 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. 
VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. 

 

 

•  vCloud	  Connector	  2.5.1	  (vCC)	  

	  

Purpose 
 
The	  purpose	  of	  the	  hardened	  virtual	  appliance	  operations	  guide	  is	  to	  address	  the	  
remaining	  technical	  requirements	  that	  are	  site-­‐specific	  decisions	  required	  to	  meet	  the	  
STIG.	  	  This	  document	  is	  intended	  for	  advanced	  level	  administrators,	  and	  should	  be	  read	  
before	  deploying	  hardened	  virtual	  appliances	  in	  a	  production	  environment.	  
 
Root password 
 
 
Most	  hardened	  appliances	  will	  either	  allow	  the	  modification	  of	  the	  root	  password	  
during	  initial	  setup,	  or	  will	  be	  pre-­‐installed	  with	  the	  root	  password	  set	  to	  ‘vmware’.	  	  It	  is	  
highly	  recommended	  to	  change	  the	  root	  password	  for	  both	  password	  complexity	  and	  
the	  cryptographic	  hashing	  to	  meet	  STIG	  compliance.	  
	  
NOTE:	  	  In	  some	  cases	  like	  vCVA	  and	  vCO,	  the	  root	  user	  account	  can	  be	  modified	  in	  the	  
VMware	  Appliance	  Management	  Infrastructure	  (VAMI)	  user	  interface.	  	  	  vCOPs	  also	  
provides	  the	  ability	  to	  modify	  the	  root	  password	  through	  a	  customer	  admin	  interface.	  	  If	  
deploying	  one	  of	  these	  appliances,	  please	  consult	  the	  admin/user	  guide	  for	  the	  specific	  
product	  on	  how	  to	  modify	  the	  root	  password.	  
	  
To	  change	  the	  root	  password	  at	  the	  command	  line,	  use	  the	  command	  ‘passwd’	  at	  the	  
root	  shell	  of	  the	  appliance.	  
 

 
NOTE:	  the	  root	  user	  bypasses	  the	  pam_cracklib	  module	  password	  complexity	  check	  
(found	  in	  /etc/pam.d/common-­‐password).	  	  	  It	  is	  imperative	  to	  manually	  ensure	  that	  the	  
root	  password	  meets	  the	  corporate	  password	  complexity	  requirements	  of	  your	  
organization.	  	  
	  
To	  check	  the	  hash	  of	  the	  root	  password,	  as	  root:	  

 

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com 
Copyright © 2010 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. 
VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. 

 

 

#	  more	  /etc/shadow	  
 

 

 
The	  password	  field	  is	  the	  second	  field	  of	  the	  shadow	  file.	  	  If	  account	  passwords	  start	  
with	  “$6$”,	  then	  the	  password	  is	  using	  a	  sha512	  hash.	  	  This	  is	  the	  standard	  hash	  for	  all	  
hardened	  appliances.	  	  If	  the	  root	  password	  does	  not	  contain	  a	  sha512	  hash,	  run	  the	  
‘passwd’	  command	  to	  change	  it.	  	  	  
	  
NOTE:	  All	  hardened	  appliances	  enable	  “enforce_for_root”	  for	  the	  pw_history	  module	  
(found	  in	  /etc/pam.d/common-­‐password),	  so	  the	  last	  five	  passwords	  will	  be	  
remembered	  by	  default.	  	  Old	  passwords	  are	  stored	  for	  each	  user	  in	  the	  
/etc/security/opasswd	  file.	  	  To	  re-­‐use	  the	  same	  password,	  delete	  the	  entry	  for	  the	  root	  
user	  in	  the	  file.	  	  Re-­‐using	  the	  same	  password	  is	  not	  recommended	  once	  the	  system	  is	  in	  
production.	  
	  
 
Password Expiry 
 
 
To	  meet	  the	  compliance	  standard	  of	  the	  STIG,	  user	  accounts	  should	  be	  set	  to	  60	  days,	  
and	  service	  accounts	  can	  be	  set	  to	  365	  days.	  	  All	  hardened	  appliances	  are	  set	  to	  create	  
accounts	  with	  a	  60	  day	  password	  expiry	  by	  default.	  	  On	  most	  hardened	  appliances,	  the	  
root	  account	  is	  set	  to	  a	  365	  day	  password	  expiry.	  	  It	  is	  highly	  recommended	  to	  check	  the	  
expiry	  on	  all	  accounts	  to	  meet	  both	  security	  and	  operation	  requirements	  standards.	  	  	  
	  
NOTE:	  As	  part	  of	  an	  organization’s	  compliance	  policies,	  a	  procedure	  should	  be	  
implemented	  to	  ensure	  that	  administrators	  do	  not	  forget	  to	  change	  their	  passwords	  
within	  the	  active	  period.	  	  If	  the	  root	  account	  expires,	  there	  will	  be	  no	  method	  in	  the	  
appliance	  to	  re-­‐instate	  the	  root	  password.	  	  It	  is	  imperative	  that	  site-­‐specific	  policies	  are	  
implemented	  to	  prevent	  administrative	  and	  root	  passwords	  from	  expiration.	  

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com 
Copyright © 2010 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. 
VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. 

 

 

	  
As	  root,	  run	  the	  following	  command	  to	  check	  the	  password	  expiry	  of	  all	  accounts:	  
	  
#	  more	  /etc/shadow	  
 

 

 
The	  password	  expiry	  is	  the	  fifth	  field	  of	  the	  shadow	  file.	  	  In	  this	  example,	  the	  root	  expiry	  
is	  set	  to	  1095	  days	  (3	  years).	  	  
	  
To	  modify	  the	  expiry	  of	  the	  root	  account	  run	  the	  following	  command	  as	  root:	  
	  
#	  passwd	  –x	  365	  root	  
	  
This	  will	  change	  the	  root	  password	  expiry	  to	  365	  days.	  	  Use	  the	  same	  command	  to	  
modify	  any	  user,	  substituting	  ‘root’	  for	  the	  specific	  account,	  and	  replacing	  the	  number	  
of	  days	  to	  meet	  the	  expiry	  standards	  of	  the	  organization.	  
 
Dodscript.sh Script 
 
 
To	  support	  additional	  high-­‐governance	  compliance	  requirements	  as	  documented	  in	  the	  
STIG,	  4	  optional	  hardening	  components	  are	  enabled	  with	  the	  execution	  of	  the	  
dodscript.sh	  script	  included	  in	  all	  hardened	  appliances,	  which:	  
	  

•  Modifies	  the	  password	  minimum	  length	  from	  8	  to	  14	  characters.	  
•  Modifies	  the	  default	  audit	  logs	  entries	  to	  meet	  the	  requirements	  of	  the	  STIG	  

(/etc/audit/audit.rules.STIG)	  and	  enables	  syscall	  logging.	  

•  Modifies	  all	  default	  profile	  scripts	  to	  eliminate	  console	  messages	  (mesg	  n).	  

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com 
Copyright © 2010 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. 
VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. 

 

 

•  Modifies	  the	  default	  banner	  for	  the	  appliance	  welcomescreen	  and	  SSH	  to	  the	  

Department	  of	  Defense	  approved	  banner	  	  
(/opt/vmware/etc/isv/welcometextDoD	  (or	  welcomtext.template	  on	  vCVA)	  for	  
the	  console	  banner	  and	  /etc/issue.DoD	  for	  the	  SSH	  banner).	  
	  

 

 
To	  enable	  this	  configuration,	  as	  root,	  run	  the	  following	  commands:	  
	  
#	  cd	  /etc	  
#	  ./dodscript.sh	  
	  
NOTE:	  	  The	  banner	  files	  can	  be	  modified	  to	  support	  non-­‐DoD	  customer	  banners.	  	  Either	  
edit	  the	  above	  files	  listed	  for	  the	  console	  and	  SSH	  banners,	  or	  create	  a	  separate	  file	  and	  
use	  a	  symbolic	  link	  to	  activate	  the	  banner	  with	  the	  following	  commands	  (in	  this	  
example,	  the	  new	  files	  are	  welcometext.CUSTOM	  and	  issue.CUSTOM):	  
	  
#	  rm	  /opt/vmware/etc/isv/welcometext	  
#	  ln	  –s	  /opt/vmware/etc/isv/welcomtext.CUSTOM	  /opt/vmware/etc/isv/welcometext	  
	  
#	  rm	  /etc/issue	  
#	  ln	  –s	  /etc/issue.CUSTOM	  /etc/issue	  
	  
For	  vCVA,	  replace	  the	  /opt/vmware/etc/isv/welcometext.template	  with	  the	  preferred	  
console	  banner	  text.	  

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com 
Copyright © 2010 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. 
VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. 

 

 

Secure Shell, Administrative Accounts, and Console 
Access 
 
 
For	  remote	  connections,	  all	  hardened	  appliances	  include	  the	  Secure	  Shell	  (SSH).	  	  
Because	  many	  appliances	  do	  not	  include	  default	  user	  accounts,	  the	  root	  account	  may	  
still	  be	  able	  to	  directly	  login	  via	  SSH.	  	  To	  meet	  the	  compliance	  standards	  for	  non-­‐
repudiation,	  the	  SSH	  server	  on	  all	  hardened	  appliances	  comes	  preconfigured	  with	  the	  
“AllowGroups	  wheel”	  entry	  to	  restrict	  ssh	  access	  to	  the	  secondary	  group	  wheel.	  	  	  
	  
NOTE:	  For	  separation	  of	  duties,	  the	  “AllowGroups	  wheel”	  entry	  can	  be	  modified	  in	  
/etc/ssh/sshd_config	  to	  use	  another	  group	  (such	  as	  sshd).	  The	  wheel	  group	  is	  enabled	  
with	  the	  pam_wheel	  module	  for	  su	  access,	  so	  members	  of	  the	  wheel	  group	  are	  allowed	  
to	  su	  –	  to	  root	  (password	  for	  root	  is	  required).	  	  	  Group	  separation	  provides	  a	  method	  for	  
users	  to	  ssh	  to	  the	  appliance,	  but	  not	  have	  the	  ability	  to	  su	  to	  root.	  	  Do	  not	  remove	  or	  
modify	  other	  entries	  in	  the	  AllowGroups	  field	  to	  ensure	  proper	  appliance	  functionality.	  	  
Any	  change	  will	  require	  a	  restart	  of	  the	  ssh	  daemon	  (#	  service	  sshd	  restart).	  
	  
Prior	  to	  removing	  root	  SSH	  access,	  create	  local	  administrative	  accounts	  that	  can	  both	  
use	  ssh	  and/or	  are	  members	  of	  the	  secondary	  wheel	  group.	  	  To	  create	  a	  local	  account	  
on	  the	  appliance,	  run	  the	  following	  command	  as	  root:	  
	  
#	  useradd	  –g	  users	  –G	  wheel	  –d	  /home/username	  –m	  –s	  /bin/bash	  username	  
(Substitute	  “wheel”	  for	  the	  group	  specified	  in	  AllowGroups	  for	  ssh	  access.	  	  To	  add	  
multiple	  secondary	  groups,	  use	  –G	  wheel,sshd)	  	  	  
	  
#	  passwd	  username	  
	  
Switch	  to	  the	  user	  to	  provide	  a	  new	  password	  so	  that	  password	  complexity	  checking	  is	  
enforced:	  
	  
#	  su	  –	  username	  
username@hostname:~>	  passwd	  
	  
NOTE:	  	  If	  the	  password	  complexity	  is	  met,	  the	  change	  of	  the	  password	  will	  complete	  
successfully.	  	  If	  the	  password	  complexity	  is	  not	  met,	  it	  will	  revert	  back	  to	  the	  original	  
password,	  so	  re-­‐run	  the	  command	  to	  set	  a	  compliant	  password	  for	  the	  user.	  
	  
Once	  login	  accounts	  are	  created	  to	  allow	  SSH	  remote	  access	  and	  wheel	  access	  (su	  –	  
root),	  the	  root	  account	  can	  be	  removed	  from	  both	  SSH	  direct	  login	  direct	  login.	  	  	  
	  

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com 
Copyright © 2010 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. 
VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. 

 

 

NOTE:	  Do	  not	  modify	  the	  PermitRootLogin	  setting	  on	  vCOPs	  appliance	  vApp.	  
	  
Prior	  to	  disabling	  direct	  root	  access,	  thoroughly	  test	  to	  ensure	  that	  authorized	  
administrators	  can	  access	  ssh	  (via	  AllowGroups)	  and	  can	  su	  to	  root	  (via	  wheel	  group).	  	  
To	  remove	  direct	  root	  login	  to	  ssh,	  modify	  the	  /etc/ssh/sshd_config	  file	  with	  the	  vi	  
editor,	  and	  replace	  the	  entry:	  
	  
(#)PermitRootLogin	  yes	  
with:	  
PermitRootLogin	  no	  
	  
Restart	  the	  sshd	  service:	  
#	  service	  sshd	  restart	  
	  
SSH	  access	  should	  also	  be	  restricted	  with	  the	  proper	  entries	  to	  limit	  access.	  	  All	  VMware	  
virtual	  appliances	  include	  the	  tcp_wrappers	  package	  to	  allow	  tcp	  supported	  daemons	  to	  
control	  the	  network	  subnets	  that	  can	  access	  the	  libwrapped	  daemons.	  	  By	  default,	  the	  
/etc/hosts.allow	  file	  contains	  a	  generic	  entry	  to	  allow	  all	  access	  to	  the	  secure	  shell:	  
	  
sshd:	  ALL	  :	  ALLOW	  
	  
It	  is	  recommended	  that	  this	  entry	  be	  changed	  for	  production	  environments	  to	  include	  
only	  the	  localhost	  entries	  and	  the	  management	  netwotk	  subnet	  for	  secure	  operations,	  
such	  as:	  
	  
sshd:	  127.0.0.1	  :	  ALLOW	  
sshd:	  [::1]	  :	  ALLOW	  
sshd:	  10.0.0.	  :	  ALLOW	  
	  
This	  example	  will	  allow	  all	  localhost	  connections	  and	  connections	  made	  by	  clients	  on	  the	  
10.0.0.0	  subnet.	  	  
	  
By	  default,	  the	  hardened	  appliances	  allow	  direct	  login	  to	  root	  via	  the	  console.	  	  Once	  
administrative	  accounts	  have	  been	  created	  for	  non-­‐repudiation	  and	  tested	  for	  wheel	  
access	  (su	  –	  root),	  direct	  root	  logins	  can	  be	  disabled	  by	  editing	  the	  /etc/securetty	  file	  as	  
root	  and	  replacing	  the	  entry:	  
	  
tty1	  
with:	  
console	  
 

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com 
Copyright © 2010 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. 
VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. 

 

 

Time Sourcing and Synchronization 
 
 
All	  hardened	  appliances	  include	  at	  least	  two	  mechanisms	  for	  time	  synchronization:	  
vmtools	  and	  the	  ntp	  service.	  	  It	  is	  recommended	  that	  virtual	  appliances	  use	  ntp	  to	  
synchronize	  for	  time	  sensitive	  environments.	  	  	  
	  
NOTE:	  	  The	  hardened	  vCenter	  Server	  Appliance	  allows	  time	  to	  be	  configured	  with	  the	  
VAMI	  user	  interface.	  	  Please	  refer	  to	  the	  vCenter	  Server	  Appliance	  administration	  guide	  
on	  how	  to	  configure	  time	  services.	  
	  
VMtools:	  	  Time	  sourcing	  with	  vmtools	  uses	  the	  time	  of	  the	  ESXi	  host	  for	  
synchronization.	  	  To	  verify	  vmtools	  time	  synchronization,	  log	  into	  the	  vCenter	  server	  
web	  client	  (https://ip_of_vcenter_server:9443).	  	  Under	  vCenter,	  navigate	  to	  the	  virtual	  
machine,	  right	  click	  the	  targeted	  VM,	  and	  select	  	  “Edit	  Settings…”	  
	  

 

 

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com 
Copyright © 2010 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. 
VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. 

 

 

 
 
 
Select	  the	  “VM	  Options”	  tab,	  then	  click	  on	  the	  “VMware	  Tools”	  drop	  down	  menu	  to	  
expose	  the	  “Time”	  field.	  	  If	  the	  “Synchronize	  guest	  time	  with	  host”	  box	  is	  checked,	  then	  
the	  appliance	  is	  using	  vmtools.	  	  Uncheck	  the	  box	  if	  planning	  to	  use	  ntp	  for	  time	  
synchronization.	  
 

 

 
 
NTP:	  	  Time	  sourcing	  with	  ntp	  leverages	  the	  ntp	  client	  in	  the	  appliance	  to	  synchronize	  
time.	  	  To	  configure	  ntp,	  first	  use	  the	  above	  instructions	  to	  ensure	  that	  vmtools	  time	  
synchronization	  is	  disabled.	  	  As	  root	  on	  the	  appliance,	  edit	  the	  /etc/ntp.conf	  file	  to	  add	  
ntp	  servers	  to	  the	  list	  of	  time	  sources	  in	  the	  form	  of:	  
	  
server	  ntpservername	  options	  

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com 
Copyright © 2010 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. 
VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. 

 

 

	  
For	  example:	  
	  
server	  time.nist	  gov	  burst	  iburst	  
	  
Add	  the	  number	  of	  local	  and	  centralized	  time	  sources	  as	  required	  for	  the	  compliance	  
standard	  of	  the	  organization.	  	  For	  trusted	  time	  sourcing,	  the	  “key”	  specification	  can	  be	  
leveraged	  to	  support	  key	  based	  authentication	  when	  listing	  time	  sources	  in	  the	  form	  of:	  
	  
server	  time.nist.gov	  burst	  iburst	  key	  1	  
	  
Where	  “1”	  is	  the	  key	  listed	  as	  “1”	  in	  /etc/ntp.keys	  file.	  	  	  For	  more	  information	  on	  setting	  
up	  ntp	  keys,	  refer	  to	  the	  Linux	  man	  page	  on	  ntp	  and	  key	  authentication.	  	  
	  
Once	  the	  /etc/ntp.conf	  file	  is	  properly	  configured,	  start	  the	  ntp	  service	  as	  root:	  
	  
#	  chkconfig	  ntp	  on	  
#	  service	  ntp	  start	  
	  
To	  check	  the	  status,	  run	  the	  following	  command	  as	  root:	  
	  
#	  service	  ntp	  status	  
 

 

 
 
Log Forwarding – Syslog-ng and Auditd 
 
 
All	  hardened	  appliances	  include	  both	  comprehensive	  system	  and	  audit	  logging	  to	  
support	  high	  governance	  compliance.	  	  See	  the	  chapter	  on	  Dodscript.sh	  to	  enable	  the	  
compliant	  audit	  rules.	  	  	  	  
	  
In	  2013,	  VMware	  released	  the	  VMware	  Log	  Insight	  product	  to	  support	  centralized	  log	  
services	  and	  log	  analytics.	  	  For	  setup	  and	  configuration	  information,	  please	  refer	  to	  the	  
product	  configuration	  guide.	  
	  

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com 
Copyright © 2010 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. 
VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. 

 

 

To	  enable	  forwarding	  of	  system	  logs,	  modify	  the	  configuration	  file	  of	  the	  syslog	  server	  to	  
specify	  the	  protocol,	  ip	  address,	  and	  port	  of	  the	  central	  log	  server.	  	  The	  syslog	  
configuration	  file	  is	  located	  in	  /etc/syslog-­‐ng/syslog-­‐ng.conf.	  	  Using	  the	  vi	  editor	  as	  root,	  
find	  the	  following	  two	  lines:	  
	  
#destination	  logserver	  {	  udp("10.10.10.10"	  port(514));	  };	  
#log	  {	  source(src);	  destination(logserver);	  };	  
	  
Uncomment	  the	  two	  lines,	  and	  modify	  the	  fields.	  	  In	  this	  example,	  using	  tcp	  as	  the	  
transport,	  10.10.10.10	  as	  the	  IP	  of	  the	  central	  syslog	  server,	  and	  port	  514	  as	  the	  syslog	  
central	  server	  port,	  the	  entry	  would	  be:	  
	  
destination	  logserver	  {	  tcp("10.10.10.10"	  port(514));	  };	  
log	  {	  source(src);	  destination(logserver);	  };	  
	  
Restart	  the	  service	  as	  root	  to	  incorporate	  the	  change:	  
#	  service	  syslog	  restart	  
	  
NOTE:	  Ensure	  that	  the	  firewall	  allows	  access	  to	  the	  port	  specified	  for	  the	  syslog	  
destination	  log	  server.	  
	  
For	  auditd	  forwarding,	  the	  vCenter	  Virtual	  Appliance	  includes	  the	  audisp-­‐remote	  
package	  to	  separate	  audit	  log	  forwarding	  from	  system	  log	  forwarding.	  	  If	  separation	  of	  
the	  two	  logging	  services	  is	  preferred,	  the	  audit	  daemon	  remote	  configuration	  file	  is	  
located	  in	  /etc/audisp/audisp-­‐remote.conf	  to	  provide	  the	  necessary	  configuration	  
settings	  to	  forward	  audit	  logs	  to	  a	  centralized	  audit	  server.	  	  Using	  the	  vi	  editor	  as	  root,	  
edit	  the	  following	  entries:	  
	  
remote_server	  =	  ip_of_remote_audit_server	  
port	  =	  port	  of	  auditd	  central	  service	  
transport	  =	  protocol	  for	  transferring	  audit	  logs	  
	  
In	  this	  example,	  using	  tcp	  as	  the	  transport,	  10.10.10.10	  as	  the	  IP	  of	  the	  auditd	  central	  
server,	  and	  port	  60,	  the	  entries	  would	  be:	  
	  
remote_server	  =	  10.10.10.10	  
port	  =	  60	  
transport	  =	  tcp	  
	  
Restart	  the	  service	  as	  root	  to	  incorporate	  the	  change:	  
#	  service	  auditd	  restart	  

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com 
Copyright © 2010 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. 
VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. 

 

 

	  
NOTE:	  Ensure	  that	  the	  firewall	  allows	  access	  to	  the	  port	  specified	  for	  the	  auditd	  
destination	  log	  server.	  
	  
For	  all	  other	  hardened	  appliances,	  the	  syslog	  remote	  plugin	  is	  provided	  to	  forward	  all	  
audit	  logs	  to	  the	  syslog-­‐ng	  service.	  	  The	  configuration	  file	  is	  located	  in	  
/etc/audisp/plugins.d/syslog.conf.	  	  Using	  the	  vi	  editor	  as	  root,	  edit	  the	  entry:	  
	  
active	  =	  no	  
to:	  
active=yes	  
	  
This	  will	  forward	  all	  audit	  logs	  to	  /var/log/messages.	  
	  
Restart	  the	  service	  as	  root	  to	  incorporate	  the	  change:	  
#	  service	  auditd	  restart	  
	  
NOTE:	  	  When	  using	  the	  high	  governance	  audit	  rules,	  there	  is	  an	  increase	  in	  the	  amount	  
of	  logging	  traffic	  that	  may	  warrant	  reconfiguration	  of	  both	  the	  q_depth	  and	  the	  
priority_boost	  of	  the	  audit	  dispatcher	  daemon.	  	  The	  configuration	  file	  is	  located	  in	  
/etc/audisp/audispd.conf.	  	  Using	  the	  vi	  editor	  as	  root,	  edit	  the	  following	  entries:	  
	  
q_depth	  =	  80	  (recommendation	  for	  high	  governance	  audit	  logs	  is	  at	  least	  1280)	  
priority_boost	  =	  4	  (recommendation	  for	  high	  governance	  audit	  logs	  is	  at	  least	  8)	  
	  
Restart	  the	  service	  as	  root	  to	  incorporate	  the	  change:	  
#	  service	  auditd	  restart	  
	  
NOTE:	  When	  using	  the	  high	  governance	  audit	  rules,	  there	  is	  an	  increase	  in	  the	  size	  of	  log	  
files.	  	  To	  decrease	  the	  number	  of	  stored	  logs	  on	  the	  hardened	  appliances	  (this	  assumes	  
log	  forwarding	  has	  been	  configured),	  customers	  can	  tune	  the	  number	  of	  daily	  log	  files	  
stored	  by	  modifying	  the	  rotation	  number.	  	  All	  log	  rotation	  configurations	  are	  stored	  in	  
/etc/logrotate.d.	  	  	  
	  
To	  control	  the	  number	  of	  stored	  daily	  log	  files	  for	  syslog,	  edit	  the	  /etc/logrotate.d/syslog	  
file	  as	  root.	  	  Modify	  all	  of	  the	  “rotate	  15”	  entries	  with	  the	  vi	  editor	  to	  the	  number	  of	  
days	  to	  store	  local	  logs.	  	  The	  recommended	  number	  of	  days	  for	  centralized	  log	  services	  
is	  at	  least	  7.	  
	  
To	  control	  the	  number	  of	  stored	  daily	  log	  files	  for	  the	  audit	  daemon,	  edit	  the	  
/etc/logrotate.d/audit	  file	  as	  root.	  	  Modify	  the	  “rotate	  15”	  entry	  with	  the	  vi	  editor	  to	  the	  

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com 
Copyright © 2010 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. 
VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. 

 

 

number	  of	  days	  to	  store	  local	  audit	  logs.	  	  The	  recommended	  number	  of	  days	  for	  
centralized	  audit	  log	  services	  is	  at	  least	  7.	  
 
 
Boot Loader (Grub) Password 
 
 
All	  hardened	  appliances	  have	  the	  ability	  to	  protect	  the	  appliance	  with	  a	  password	  for	  
modification	  of	  the	  default	  boot	  settings.	  	  To	  verify	  it’s	  configuration,	  read	  the	  
/boot/grub/menu.lst	  file.	  	  The	  third	  line	  should	  contain:	  
	  
password	  -­‐-­‐md5	  	  $1$(followed	  by	  additional	  characters)	  
	  
To	  change	  or	  add	  a	  password	  for	  Grub,	  run	  the	  following	  procedure	  as	  root:	  
	  
#	  grub	  
	  
The	  grub	  shell	  will	  appear.	  
	  

 
Run	  the	  “md5crypt”	  command	  to	  create	  the	  hashed	  password.	  	  Once	  you	  type	  in	  a	  
password,	  the	  hash	  will	  be	  presented.	  	  Copy	  the	  password.	  	  Run	  the	  “quit”	  command	  to	  
return	  to	  the	  root	  shell.	  
 

 

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com 
Copyright © 2010 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. 
VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. 

 

 

 

 

 
	  
Use	  the	  vi	  editor	  as	  root	  to	  modify	  the	  /boot/grub/menu.lst	  file.	  	  Add	  the	  following	  to	  
the	  third	  line	  of	  the	  file:	  
	  
password	  -­‐-­‐md5	  	  md5hash	  
 

 
Paste	  the	  md5	  encrypted	  hash	  to	  the	  end	  of	  the	  entry,	  and	  save	  the	  file.	  
 
NFS and NIS 
 
 
All	  hardened	  appliances	  come	  prepackaged	  with	  the	  ability	  to	  serve	  as	  both	  a	  NIS	  and	  
NFS	  client.	  	  In	  2013,	  NIS	  service	  support	  is	  depreciated.	  	  NFS	  is	  included	  as	  a	  non-­‐
standard	  means	  of	  supporting	  syslog	  shipping.	  	  If	  neither	  of	  the	  two	  services	  are	  
required,	  it	  is	  recommended	  that	  they	  are	  disabled.	  	  To	  disable	  the	  services	  in	  the	  
hardened	  virtual	  appliances,	  run	  the	  following	  set	  of	  commands	  as	  root:	  
	  
#	  chkconfig	  ypbind	  off	  
#	  chkconfg	  nfs	  off	  
#	  chkconfig	  rpcbind	  off	  
#	  service	  ypbind	  stop	  
#	  service	  nfs	  stop	  
#	  service	  rpcbind	  stop	  

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com 
Copyright © 2010 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. 
VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc. in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective companies. 

 

