Branch Office Desktop
VMware Solution Lab Validation

H O W - T O   G U I D E

Solution Overview 

Regional and branch offices need access to corporate assets but often lack local administrative resources to maintain and manage these 
assets in a timely manner. The Branch Office Desktop delivers consistent and scalable desktops as a managed service for remote and branch 
office workers across the WAN to maximize uptime, streamline desktop management, and drive down operational costs. With VMware View 
you can:

•	

•	

•	

•	

Provide consistent high performance desktop experience across the LAN and the WAN using VMware View with PCoIP

Simplify desktop IT management and accelerate provisioning of remote desktops

Ensure high availability with better SLAs

Reduce desktop operating costs and travel across sites and locations

The lab identified the hybrid approach combining best of both worlds in VMware View and VMware Mirage technologies. The VMware Branch 
Office Desktop is seamlessly assembled to offer user flexbility, enforce branch office policy, single image management, and deliver optimum 
experience. By integrating vCenter Operations  Management Suite (vCOPS) and View Adapter collection at the branch, the solution offers the 
business the visibility and more flexibility for managing their branches. 

The core design includes

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

Application Performance Management and end user monitoring tools to ensure delivery the best user expereince 

vCOPS for View (V4V) for virtual infrastructure single pane of management 

VMware View and VMware Mirage to support both physical and virtual image management, persistent and stateless desktops

Security best practices for anti-virus protection with vCNS* Suite and vSphere Endpoint for virtual environment and recovery from 
virus infections, in addition recovery for physical desktop to last known good image with VMware Mirage

Full VMDK level backup practices on virtual profiles / persona server, SQL database, and all infrastructure VMs to ensure a fast 
recovery when needed

By bringing the VMware View compute design, resource, and workload locally to the branch offices delivers the true “Branch-in-the-Box” 
concept execution.  The design leverages VMware Rapid Desktop Appliances.  By using VMware Mirage to manage all physical computers and 
failover to persistent virtual desktops it’s now easy to accelerate desktop management and software delivery. 

2

BRANCH OFFICE DESKTOPSolution OverviewArchitecture & DesignValidation ResultDesign ComponentsArchitecture & Design 

In some user scenarios, VMware Mirage can be deployed at the branch on its own for simple and single image management deployment. 
In our solution lab validation, we explore the hybrid approach taking the best of both worlds, VMware View  centralized management 
and VMware Mirage image management. In the branch location, one or more clients can be designated dynamically as a Reflector to 
serve peers and only one image brought across for all users. This helps delivering the images more efficient and help reduce the network 
utilizaiton. 

In the main datacenter, a simple deployment of VMware Mirage Server cluster with file portal is deployed. Enables peer-to-peer 
downloading for Mirage updates to remote offices. You will install the 2 MB Mirage Client in all physical and virtaul desktops. The use case 
is to allow easy failover from physical to virtaul with exact same desktop experience. 

On storage implementation, either SAN, NAS or local storage is supported. In our lab validation, we assume 15 GB per user and enables 
compression on the selected Mirage storage volume (for savings up to 25%). 

On the network side, Mirage consumes average of 15 Kbits/sec per user, which equals roughly 50 MB per user per day.. Of course, the 
workload varies by use cases. Bandwidth will be dynamically adjusted depending on user activities to ensure best user experience.

VMware View provides central management and real-time secure access. You can create either persistent desktop or stateless desktop for 
various workloads in any branch functions. All View event database, security events, user business application transaction QoS data, and 
backup events can be fully integrated into the vCOPS with View Adapter (V4V). 

The Branch Office Desktop carries some VMware ISV partner’s solution in this design including load balancing, backup, replication, WAN 
acceleration, security and data loss protection (DLP) products. The exhaustive vendor listed to remain neutral as a functional validation 
purpose only. 

* VMware vCloud Networking and Security (vCNS) is formally vShield Suite 

3

BRANCH OFFICE DESKTOPSolution OverviewArchitecture & DesignValidation ResultDesign ComponentsDatacenter - Basic

•	 Mirage Core at main datacenter

vCenter

Backup Core

ESX Host - Main Datacenter

VMware

Mirage Core

Backup

View Appliance + 
VMware Distributed 
Branch O†ce

Branch

vShield Edge VPN

WAN

ESX Host - Branch View Appliance

VMware Re(cid:1)ector(s)

VMware Mirage
Single Image

Update &

App Layering

VSS

AD

VCS

vShield
Manager

vCenter

vCOPS and 

V4V*

SQL
DB

Global
Catalog

Domain
Controller

Mail
Server

App

Servers

Backup 
Appliance

Endpoint

Security i.e AV

Print
Server

Persistent VM 
en
eent VM
Persistei
Persiste
Persi
Persi
eent VM
nt VM
nt VM
t VM
ste
ste
ste
e
with Mirage Client 
w
with 
age Clien
age Client
t
M
M
Mi
ra
a

Stateless Desktop Pool

Phy
PhyPhh
sica
ca
al
alll
l 
ll
l
ys
ys
siciii
Physical 
Desk
Des
ktop
p
p
p
kto
sk
Desktop
with VMware 
Mirage Client

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

Images are being stored and 
manipulated in datacenter

Redundancy backup for images

vCNS Edge VPN created for secure 
access for Application Servers to main 
datacenter 

SSL can be enabled for all 
communication between the client and 
the server.

vCNS App highlighted in red for 
security policy rules and compliance 
settings

CIFS share is created for Thinapp, 
Persona, and corporate files

•	 Domain Controller with Glocal Catalog 

Service configuration 

•	

VMDK level backup on all infrastructure 
VM and Mirage Reflector VMs

•	 Mirage Client installed 

•	

Secure endpoint access 

4

BRANCH OFFICE DESKTOPSolution OverviewArchitecture & DesignValidation ResultDesign ComponentsValidation Result 

The main objectives for this validation are:

•	

•	

•	

Enhanced local experience by bringing VDI workload directly to local branch 

Ease of management: Any level of IT professional can have role-based access to manage the branch office environment either via 
View Administration console or vCOPS management console. 

Security: It’s fully deployed with complete vCloud Networking and Security (vCNS) from Edge, App, to Data Protection along 
with 3rd party ISV’s anti-virus products. In addition, the lab also deploys Microsoft RADIUS for View authentication with 2FA 
authentication like USB eToken access into the physical and virtual desktops.

This test activity supports the goals of the design objectives by extending coverage of VMware View and Mirage, combining and exploring 
interactions between ISV products, as well as Network Systems in a customer representative environment. The extended coverage of designs, 
combined with the sustaining capability result will be detailed in the Branch Office Desktop Validated Design Guide at VMware Desktop 
Solution Portal which will help ensure improved quality and a successful real-world deployment. 

5

MOBILE SECURE DESKTOPSolution OverviewArchitecture & DesignValidation ResultDesign ComponentsDesign Components 

The following design components represents options and not an abosolute apprach. You should consult with your current software and 
hardware partners to put together your branch office desktop solution. 

Software Product
vSphere
vSphere with vCenter 
VMware View with Persona Management 
VMware View Composer
VMware Mirage 
vCloud Networking and Security Suite 
Application Transaction Monitoring / User Perspectives
vCOps 
vCOps for View
Backup and Restore
Antivirus

 

Function / Description / Version 
5.0.1 
5.0
5.1
3.0

5.1
Aternity 
5.0.2
1.0
CommVault Simpana 9 
Trend Micro Deep Security 8.0

You can leverage any Rapid Desktop Appliance for your hardware consideration in the branch appliance. For exhaustive list on all 
components and how to configure them, please refer to the Validated Design Guide. 

VMware, Inc. 3401 Hillview Avenue Palo Alto CA 94304 USA Tel 877-486-9273 Fax 650-427-5001 www.vmware.com
Copyright © 2012 VMware, Inc. All rights reserved. This product is protected by U.S. and international copyright and intellectual property laws. VMware products are covered by one or more patents listed at
http://www.vmware.com/go/patents. VMware is a registered trademark or trademark of VMware, Inc., in the United States and/or other jurisdictions. All other marks and names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective 
companies. Item No: VMW-HG-SECUWKSPDELIVERY-PLAYBK-20120427-WEB

6

BRANCH OFFICE DESKTOPSolution OverviewArchitecture & DesignValidation ResultDesign Components