 

Publication Date: 23 March 2009 
 
Cool Vendors in Storage Technology and Systems, 2009 
Roger W. Cox,  John Monroe,  Pushan Rinnen,  Stanley Zaffos,  Donna Taylor,  Joseph Unsworth 

Research
ID Number: G00165287

This report analyzes five vendors that develop and bring to market technologies that 
address the issues of cost, performance, management and disaster recovery (DR) 
associated with a storage infrastructure. IT personnel responsible for deploying and 
managing storage infrastructures can benefit from learning about the technologies 
covered in this report as they seek to better manage service-level agreements (SLAs) 
during these difficult economic times. 

 

Key Findings 

•  Performance, use and availability of large complex and sophisticated storage area 

networks (SANs) can be improved by using advanced analytical tools that provide real-
time visibility into SAN traffic flow, actual performance and use at the fabric level. 

•  Solid-state drive (SSD) technology addresses the input/output (I/O), power and cooling 
dilemma associated with extreme transaction-oriented applications that, until now, the 
user has had to downstroke hard-disk drives (HDDs) to satisfy performance SLAs. 

•  Cost-effective and foolproof DR solutions are critical should a catastrophic event impact 

the primary data center. 

•  Applications such as digital media benefit from storage and file systems that support 
highly scalable multipetabyte capacities under a single name space with near-linear 
performance scaling as nodes are added. 

Recommendations 

• 

• 

IT professionals should consider and evaluate innovative technologies from emerging 
vendors if they reduce cost and simplify the storage infrastructure and improve data 
availability. 

IT personnel responsible for implementing and managing SANs should evaluate the 
benefit of incorporating deep monitoring and analytical tools to improve performance, 
availability, and to reduce capital expenditure (capex) and operating expenditure (opex). 

© 2009 Gartner, Inc. and/or its Affiliates. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction and distribution of this publication in any form 
without prior written permission is forbidden. The information contained herein has been obtained from sources believed to 
be reliable. Gartner disclaims all warranties as to the accuracy, completeness or adequacy of such information. Although 
Gartner's research may discuss legal issues related to the information technology business, Gartner does not provide legal 
advice or services and its research should not be construed or used as such. Gartner shall have no liability for errors, 
omissions or inadequacies in the information contained herein or for interpretations thereof. The opinions expressed herein 
are subject to change without notice. 

 

ANALYSIS 

This research does not constitute an exhaustive list of vendors in any given technology area, but 
rather, is designed to highlight interesting, new and innovative vendors, products and services. 
Gartner disclaims all warranties, express or implied, with respect to this research, including any 
warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. 
What You Need to Know 
The storage infrastructure continues to grow in capacity and complexity. Current HDD technology 
is insufficient to meet demanding performance SLAs without sacrificing capacity, thereby 
increasing capex and opex. In many cases, SANs now represent an organization's primary 
storage infrastructure architecture for the delivery of mission-critical applications and data. Yet, 
the intricate construction of SAN infrastructures puts optimum performance, use and availability at 
risk. Applications outside the purview of a general IT infrastructure, such as converting digital 
content into different video formats, require scale-out storage systems with integrated file systems 
that support an extremely large pool of data and scale performance as capacity is increased. The 
vexing issues associated with data protection, data loss and distance between primary and DR 
centers, as well as cost, are being addressed by leveraging technology associated with the 
aviation industry. The challenges associated with database monitoring, compliance management, 
and security and event management require new and innovative solutions that simplify these 
tasks. 
Axxana, Wellesley, Massachusetts, U.S.; headquarters, Tel-Aviv, Israel (www.axxana.com) 
Analysis by Stanley Zaffos 
Why Cool: The aptly named Axxana Phoenix is designed to recover every last protected write 
operation in the midst of catastrophic failure or from the ruins of a production data center and 
transmit it to the DR site using broadband technologies. Phoenix achieves this zero data loss 
without the use of "data bunkers," and their attendant capex and opex, in storage systems. 
Phoenix is an out-of-band network-based replication appliance that during normal data center 
operation functions as a hardened repository for pending protected writes. Unlike other network-
based replication appliances that replace storage-system-based replication functionality, Phoenix 
sends only the pending writes it is holding to the secondary site following a catastrophic event at 
the primary site. This makes Phoenix deployments less disruptive than other network-based 
replication solutions and lowers the cost and complexity of Phoenix hardware and software. The 
reduced hardware requirements made it easier to package the repository and broadband portions 
of the appliance in a fireproof impact-proof black box similar in design to the flight data recorders 
used on all commercial aircraft. Furthermore, instead of using relatively fragile, power-hungry, 
heat-producing disks, the black box uses an SSD to hold and protect pending protected writes. 
Challenges: Axxana's primary challenge is its ability to negotiate cooperative agreements with 
various storage vendors to provide the Phoenix appliance with the asynchronous replication 
status data it needs to flush successfully transmitted writes to the secondary site. So far, Axxana 
has negotiated agreements with two established storage vendors, and it claims to have additional 
agreements in its pipeline. The system is in beta test, with general availability scheduled for April 
2009. 
Who Should Care: If Axxana successfully negotiates agreements with major storage vendors, 
and the Phoenix appliance performs as advertised, it will deliver the benefits of three-site storage 
solutions at a dramatically lower price without the disruptions normally associated with changing 
storage-system-based DR topologies. 

Publication Date: 23 March 2009/ID Number: G00165287 
© 2009 Gartner, Inc. and/or its Affiliates. All Rights Reserved. 
 

Page 2 of 6

 

 
Fusion-io, Salt Lake City, Utah, U.S. (www.fusionio.com) 
Analysis by John Monroe and Joseph Unsworth 
Why Cool: Fusion-io is currently providing enterprise-grade SSDs that deliver industry-leading 
ultrafast random I/O performance with sub-50-microseconds access latency through the PCI-
express (PCIe) interface. The relative ubiquity of the PCI bus in network environments creates an 
opportunity to link with multiple devices, which is why Fusion-io decided to put enterprise-grade 
SSD SAN functionality in a PCIe-based design. This approach requires considerable software 
expertise to ensure seamless integration with existing network and storage architectures, which 
Fusion-io seems to have achieved. Through proprietary NAND flash management techniques, 
which feature redundant array of independent disks (RAID) functionality, Fusion-io has achieved 
impressive performance — in some instances, greater than 100x increases in I/O access speeds 
compared with HDDs — without great compromise to the reliability of their solutions. The 
company commenced shipments in April 2008, has announced deals with HP and IBM, and 
currently claims to have more than 300 customers. Dell has taken a financial stake in Fusion-io. 
Challenges: Although Fusion-io has a unique and valuable technology that can be integrated 
with the system at the kernel level and can have clear benefits for performance, power and total 
cost of ownership, its initial cost will prove to be an obstacle for mainstream adoption, given the 
difficult economic climate and reduced IT spending budgets. Also, the enterprise-grade SSD 
market is permeated by hype and deluged by disappointing vendor offerings that have created 
widespread confusion and impeded adoption. As NAND flash technology advances to new 
capacity levels, which will increase the need to prevent data degradation, Fusion-io must maintain 
and extend the quality of its solutions in both read and write performance, as well as reliability, to 
continue to attract Tier 1 customers. Developing a clear and consistent marketing message 
supported by major OEM customers will be critical to differentiate Fusion-io's products from those 
of its competitors, to create awareness and to drive understanding, but expectations for the 
implementation of this nascent technology must be correctly set. Finally, Fusion-io's single-source 
solution comes from a small company that is competing against larger established storage 
solution providers. To stimulate adoption, multiple sources and critical software support will be 
vital, but this will also invite considerable competition in the long term. 
Who Should Care: Enterprise users with extraordinary demands for storage network 
acceleration would benefit from high-bandwidth performance gains with minimal latency, reduced 
footprint and reduced power. 
LogLogic, San Jose, California, U.S. (www.loglogic.com) 
Analysis by Donna Taylor 
Why Cool: Founded in 2002, LogLogic is a global provider of open-log management and 
intelligence. With more than 700 customers, LogLogic takes a unique approach to log 
management using a software appliance, instead of what's previously been done at the hardware 
level and in the kernel. Bandwidth is reduced, because it is carrying only the compressed and 
encrypted log file and not the results of every write associated with the transaction. Adding layers 
of intelligence enables the technology to collect and translate log files, delivering normalized 
views of the data and summarizing activity in a heterogeneous environment, while adding 
meaning and context to the data automatically. The technology also addresses compliance, risk 
mitigation, and security issues. Because the fingerprint could one day be needed as evidence in 
court, the data is stored in original/complete (but compressed) form, and chain of custody is 
maintained at all times. The archives are tamperproof (by creating a check sum upon collection) 
and can be encrypted. LogLogic introduced three new "log-powered applications" in February 
2009. The applications are focused on specific business needs, such as database activity 
monitoring, compliance management, and security event management, as well as further 

Publication Date: 23 March 2009/ID Number: G00165287 
© 2009 Gartner, Inc. and/or its Affiliates. All Rights Reserved. 
 

Page 3 of 6

 

 
automating workflow and tailoring reports. The additional complement of offerings will expand its 
feature set of storage-agnostic log management tools. 
Challenges: LogLogic's greatest challenge comes from its competitors. Although LogLogic's 
approach to log and records management is unique, its competitors offer alternatives that 
address the same issues, but with a different approach. Larger, vertically integrated competitors 
offering log management products and services may present a hurdle in a bid to secure a 
customer that prefers to sole-source its business. 
Who Should Care: IT professionals interested in better managing their data and addressing their 
records management needs, based on legislative requirements and in preparation for e-
discovery, should consider LogLogic in their purchasing decisions. Bandwidth reduction and 
greater safeguards against internal and external threats via log management will result in cost 
savings to the customer in time saved and threats avoided. 
Omneon, Sunnyvale, California, U.S. (www.omneon.com) 
Analysis by Pushan Rinnen 
Why Cool: Founded in 1998, Omneon made its name in the video server market and the TV 
broadcasting industry with its media servers for multichannel ingest and playout. In June 2006, it 
launched its MediaGrid Active Storage System, which constitutes a small portion of its $100 
million overall annual revenue and 700 customers. The MediaGrid is composed of content 
directors (metadata server cluster) and content servers (six or more nodes with embedded Serial 
Advanced Technology Attachment disk drives). A clustered file system runs on Linux and 
manages the grid's storage volumes. Client access is either through an agent (Windows, Linux 
and Apple) or a NAS gateway that supports Network File System, Common Internet File System, 
Advanced Function Printing and FTP protocols. Although many cluster file systems are in the 
market, what is cool about Omneon MediaGrid storage is its ability to leverage the grid to run 
CPU-intensive processing applications, as well as its own transcoding application to automatically 
convert the digital content into different video formats, simplifying the IT infrastructure and 
workflow for the broadcasting industry. It also has a long list of software developers for the 
broadcasting and digital media industry, whose software are integrated with Omneon products via 
its open application programming interfaces. 
Challenges: Omneon has a low profile and weak brand as a storage company. It has practically 
zero storage presence outside the media/broadcasting industry. Omneon's key competitors, Isilon 
and DataDirect Networks, are also growing fast in this industry and may catch up in the 
application integration front. Those competitors have much-stronger storage brands, as well as 
broader presence in multiple vertical industries. 
Who Should Care: IT specialists in the media/broadcasting industry should consider Omneon on 
their shortlist for storage vendors. 
Virtual Instruments, Scotts Valley, California, U.S. (www.virtualinstruments.com) 
Analysis by Roger W. Cox 
Why Cool: Virtual Instruments addresses the complex and thorny issues associated with large-
scale Fibre Channel SAN performance optimization, availability, root cause fault analysis and 
overprovisioned switches. Its SAN infrastructure, vendor-agnostic VirtualWisdom family of deep-
monitoring and analysis hardware and software products provides real-time visibility into SAN 
traffic flows, actual performance and use at the fabric level. This enables IT personnel 
responsible for managing Fibre Channel SAN and virtualized server infrastructures to have real-
time visibility of application-to-SAN performance, respond faster to issues affecting availability, 

Publication Date: 23 March 2009/ID Number: G00165287 
© 2009 Gartner, Inc. and/or its Affiliates. All Rights Reserved. 
 

Page 4 of 6

 

 
correlate trends over time, verify SLA performance, and reduce capital and operating SAN-related 
expenditures. 
Virtual Instruments Traffic Analysis Points (TAPs), Fibre Channel ProbeFCX devices, and Portal 
and Views software represents the standard VirtualWisdom Enterprise solution. The high-density 
TAPs are passive and nonintrusive hardware devices that connect to Fibre Channel SAN links 
collecting real-time data for failure analysis and performance-monitoring purposes. The 
VirtualWisdom Fibre Channel ProbeFCX, an out-of-band appliance, use the passive TAPs to 
access storage network traffic to detect slowdowns in application performance; measure latency 
from servers to storage systems; proactively detect failing SAN devices; identify congested or 
underutilized ports; and detect and track Fibre Channel and Small Computer System Interface 
(SCSI) protocol metrics and faults. A baseline of performance and maintenance metrics can be 
created to verify any impacts caused by changes to the SAN infrastructure, such as operating 
system or firmware upgrades and zone modifications. The ProbeFCX analyzes every packet on a 
single, or when configured with the VirtualWisdom Rover, multiple Fibre Channel SAN link(s) at 
line rates. The Probe FCX end-to-end SCSI device conversations and link metrics are collected 
by the VirtualWisdom Portal every second and stored in a local MySQL database for viewing and 
analysis. The VirtualWisdom Views software enables IT personnel to proactively review detailed 
metrics and alerts in table and graph presentation, as well as to chart historical trends regarding 
the performance, use and health of the SAN infrastructure. All views may be updated at user-
defined intervals. 
Challenges: Virtual Instruments' success will largely depend on how broadly and swiftly it can 
translate its SAN optimization technology leadership into market leadership. 
Who Should Care: IT professionals should consider Virtual Instruments' SAN optimization and 
performance evaluation VirtualWisdom solution as an integral part of their cost optimization and 
infrastructure modernization strategy as they strive to meet demanding user SLA requirements 
within constricted budgets. 

RECOMMENDED READING 

"Emerging Technology Analysis: Solid-State Drives for Enterprise Storage" 
"User Survey Analysis: Data Center Conference Instant Polling Results for Enterprise Storage 
and Vendor Analysis, SSDs and SRM, North America, 2008" 
"U.S. Data Center Conference Focuses on How to Do More With Less" 

 

Publication Date: 23 March 2009/ID Number: G00165287 
© 2009 Gartner, Inc. and/or its Affiliates. All Rights Reserved. 
 

Page 5 of 6

 

 
REGIONAL HEADQUARTERS 

Corporate Headquarters 
56 Top Gallant Road 
Stamford, CT 06902-7700 
U.S.A. 
+1 203 964 0096 

European Headquarters 
Tamesis 
The Glanty 
Egham 
Surrey, TW20 9AW 
UNITED KINGDOM 
+44 1784 431611 

Asia/Pacific Headquarters 
Gartner Australasia Pty. Ltd. 
Level 9, 141 Walker Street 
North Sydney 
New South Wales 2060 
AUSTRALIA 
+61 2 9459 4600 

Japan Headquarters 
Gartner Japan Ltd. 
Aobadai Hills, 6F 
7-7, Aobadai, 4-chome 
Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-0042 
JAPAN 
+81 3 3481 3670 

Latin America Headquarters 
Gartner do Brazil 
Av. das Nações Unidas, 12551 
9° andar—World Trade Center 
04578-903—São Paulo SP 
BRAZIL 
+55 11 3443 1509 

Publication Date: 23 March 2009/ID Number: G00165287 
© 2009 Gartner, Inc. and/or its Affiliates. All Rights Reserved. 
 

Page 6 of 6

 

