 
 

S O L U T I O N   P R O F I L E 

Making the Invisible Visible – the modern data center 

requires infrastructure visibility  

April 2010 

 

 
Today,  when  we  bring  up  the  topic  of  “visibility”  within  the  mission  critical 
networks  of  the  enterprise,  most  organizations  turn  immediately  to  their 
practices  with  sniffers,  traffic  analyzers,  and  trending  tools  –  more  often  than 
not focused purely on their IP-based communication networks.  But these tools 
can  turn  into  nothing  more  than  a  temporary  placebo  when  fighting 
performance  problems,  and  trying  to  gain  visibility  into  the  infrastructure  for  more  strategic 
management.    Why?    The  performance  of  business  critical  applications  often  depends  upon 
more difficult to access fabrics – such as the fiber of Fibre Channel (FC) and FICON networks 
threaded  between  mission  critical  storage,  switches,  directors,  and  HBAs  of  computing 
systems.  Peering into an easier to access communications network may offer valuable insights 
into symptoms such as increasing latency, but such tools will reveal little about the domain of 
the  infrastructure  that  is  really  the  root  of  most  performance  issues  –  the  storage  network.  
Treating  such  symptoms  without  insight  into  the  underlying  cause  does  little  more  than 
applying  a  short-term  patch  to  the  problem.    We  can  call  out  time  and  again  the  tales  of  IT 
practitioners  where  a  troublesome  problem  could  only  be  solved,  or  the  claims  of  a  vendor 
could only be verified, by peering into an enterprise SAN. 
 
In the past, it used to be costly and difficult to analyze interactions across fiber connections.  
But the equipment to tap into and analyze the data streams within a fiber connection are now 
more affordable than ever, and designing in easy access for monitoring and visibility of these 
fabrics should be a ubiquitous best practice.  But too often it remains the case that access is an 
afterthought  -  often  coming  to  light  only  after  a  significant  failure  occurs.    With  out-of-sync 
expectations  about  cost,  and  increasingly  complex  fabrics,  the  enterprise  often  fails  to  think 
about how and where to integrate access when systems are being designed and deployed.  In 
turn, gaining visibility when problems occur means retrofitting access and this can become an 
enormous problem, often requiring planned downtime, or causing unplanned disruption.  This 
shouldn’t be the case.   
 
In this solution profile, we’ll examine the importance of SAN visibility.  We’ll then examine one 
solution  for  integrating  physical  access  –  Virtual  Instrument’s  SANInsight  Tap  Patch  Panel 
Systems,  and  look  at  the  common  questions  that  come  into  practitioners’  minds  about  how, 
when, why, and where to integrate access into today’s infrastructures. 
 

87 Elm Street, Suite 900     Hopkinton, MA  01748      Tel:  508-435-5040    Fax:  508-435-1530      www.tanejagroup.com 

Copyright© The TANEJA Group, Inc. 2010. All Rights Reserved 

 

1 of 9 

 
 

S O L U T I O N   P R O F I L E 

Visibility – beyond mandatory 
Providing  visibility  into  the  complex  data 
center  is  an  increasing  challenge. 
  Data 
centers have become denser, larger scale, and 
more  complex  than  ever  before. 
  With 
complexity,  the 
laissez-faire  approach  to 
traditional troubleshooting – figure out what 
tools are available, or find a sniffer, and then 
figure out how to get access to the right parts 
of a data stream – is simply no longer viable.  
Systems  are  too  complex  and  too  mission 
critical to tolerate such latencies.  Moreover, 
visibility is simply mandatory for optimizing 
the  use  of  the  virtualized  data  center  – 
environments  without  visibility  will  never 
observe  latency  issues,  transmission  errors, 
or  misconfigurations  before  they  become 
problems  or  extract  a  needless  premium  in 
  Then  when  such 
wasted  capabilities. 
common 
(we’ve  never  seen  an 
infrastructure without at least a few) do fully 
blossom  into  full-fledged  problems,  IT  staff 
will find it impossible to cost-effectively drill 
into the root causes behind these issues. 
 
Patching over Access 
The  problem  boils  down  to  getting  the  right 
physical access to this complex infrastructure 
in the midst of increasing density and scale – 
and physical access in this case is inclusive of 
access  by  a  human  body  or  monitoring  tool, 
as  well  as  access  to  live,  unaltered  data 
streams.  While  physical  access  is  difficult 
enough in the ubiquitous IP network, the IP 
network  barely  touches  the  more  mission 
critical fabrics in the enterprise – such as the 
fiber  networks  supporting  protocols 
like 
Fibre  Channel  or  FICON.    And  while  the 
ubiquitous  IP  network  –  as  a  point  of 

issues 

access 

patch 

10 

related 

to 

panels 

for  monitoring 

physical 
and 
observation  –  may  offer  somewhat  better 
access  than  fiber  networks,  the  underlying 
issues behind major application problems or 
performance impacts are today as often as 9 
times  out  of 
storage 
interactions, and the fiber networks that such 
interactions commonly take place upon. 
 
In our view, this is a strange problem to have 
in  an  industry  that  has  long  ago  come  to 
terms  with  a  strategic  use  of  patch  panels 
being a best practice when designing physical 
connectivity.    Physical  cabling  is  a  key  asset 
in today’s complex data center, and can be so 
dense  and  interwoven  that  it  practically 
becomes  a  part  of  the  physical  building.  
Integrating 
provides 
configurability,  and  flexible  on-going  use  of 
the cabling plant as the data center changes.  
 
But  in  this  industry  immersed  in  patch 
panels  and  highly  standardized  cabling 
practices, designing cabling infrastructure for 
visibility  into  the  SAN  has  barely  matured. 
Today’s  systems  simply  cannot 
tolerate 
disruptions,  and  the  lowly  patch  panel  does 
nothing  to  provide  access  to  live  sessions. 
The  consideration  of  access 
these 
networks, 
environments 
leveraging  highly  optimized  cabling  plants 
and state of the art connectivity, is too often 
left by the wayside. 
 
Devices = Access-lite 
In  realization  of  this,  network  vendors  have 
long built equipment to perform actions like 
port mirroring.  But there are too many cases 
where  port  mirroring  simply  isn’t  sufficient.  
A  port  mirror  never 
represents  pure 

even  within 

to 

87 Elm Street, Suite 900     Hopkinton, MA  01748      Tel:  508-435-5040    Fax:  508-435-1530      www.tanejagroup.com 

Copyright© The TANEJA Group, Inc. 2010. All Rights Reserved 

 

2 of 9 

 
 

S O L U T I O N   P R O F I L E 

for 

Model 

unadulterated  access  to  a  live  data  stream.  
With mirrored ports, lower level interactions 
on  a  fabric  are  filtered  out  as  frames  are 
repeated  out  the  monitoring  port.    Such 
repeated traffic only includes logical and data 
interactions,  and  may  miss  many  physical 
characteristics  on  any  given  cable  –  such  as 
framing or CRC problems, latency, and other 
characteristics  –  that  can  only  be  directly 
observed.    Within  the  5  layer,  FC0  to  FC4, 
Fibre  Channel  corollary  to  the  abstract  OSI 
Reference 
network 
communications,  over  half  of  the  layers  are 
missed  with  port  mirroring  approaches.  
Moreover,  port  mirroring  can  do  little  to 
easily provide real-time, latency-aware access 
to  interactions  that  cross  multiple  devices 
and  ports,  or  provide  full  visibility  into 
sessions that exceed the bandwidth of single 
ports  on  single  switches.    Mirror  ports  also 
shut  down  when  traffic  is  heavy,  which  is 
exactly when you need data on infrastructure 
performance the most. 
 
Access must be Best Practice 
Given  the  importance  of  visibility,  and  the 
limitations  of  switch  and  router  based 
solutions, 
it  stands  to  reason  that  the 
industry  should  be  insisting  on  physical 
access  to  a  degree  never  before  witnessed.  
For  many  in  the  industry,  the  possibility  of 
increasing 
specialized  high 
performance  networks  is  often  overlooked 
because  it  is  assumed  to  be  unobtainable  or 
economically  unfeasible.    But  this  simply 
isn’t  true.    The  technology  exists  today  to 
provide access to these infrastructures – even 
fiber-based  networks  –  even  on  a  very  wide 
scale  that  includes  every  port  on  even  the 
largest  fabrics.    These  devices  are  Traffic 

access 

to 

  Moreover, 

Access  Points  (TAPs)  –  passive 
in-line 
splitters  that  are  integrated  in  dense  patch 
panels  to  provide  full  visibility  of  what  is 
being transmitted over individual cables and 
ports. 
these  solutions  are 
economic  in  cost  and  physical  space  and 
consume no power.  Such solutions can make 
access  economically  achievable 
for  any 
organization. 
 
Organizations too often do not consider these 
technologies,  and  when  they  do  consider 
them, they are pressed to figure out why and 
how  to  integrate  such  technology  into  their 
infrastructure.   
 
To be clear, retrofitting taps into an existing 
infrastructure can be a challenging endeavor.  
While  organizations  facing  a  crisis  and 
suddenly  in  need  of  access  within  existing 
physical  plants  easily  overcome  any  of  the 
potential  obstacles,  the  simple  truth  of  the 
matter  is  that  reworking  an  operational 
physical  plant  often  demonstrates  one  or 
more  of  Murphy’s 
laws  (accidents  will 
happen  when  least  convenient),  and  that 
putting technologies like multi-pathing to the 
test turns up less robustness than expected. 
 
In  turn,  there  are  three  places  in  which  to 
realize that physical access is a best practice, 
and  to  make  efforts  to  put  physical  access 
into place.   
 
Best  Practice  #1:  With  visibility  in 
mind, realize access should be a “built-
to”  specification  for  all  new  data 
center  infrastructure.    First,  with  an 
understanding of the importance of visibility 
and its relationship to physical access at top 
of mind, all data center technologists should 

87 Elm Street, Suite 900     Hopkinton, MA  01748      Tel:  508-435-5040    Fax:  508-435-1530      www.tanejagroup.com 

Copyright© The TANEJA Group, Inc. 2010. All Rights Reserved 

 

3 of 9 

 
 

S O L U T I O N   P R O F I L E 

to 

in 

intentionally  bridging 

turn 
the  gap 
between  how  their  organizations  build  the 
data center versus how they need to use the 
data  center.    Each  new  build  should  make 
sure  that  physical  plant  specialists  and 
technologists  work  together  to  design  for 
access into their mission critical fabrics. 
 
Best Practice #2: Realize visibility is a 
mandatory  best  practice 
the 
consolidating  infrastructure,  and  you 
should  therefore  introduce  improved 
visibility  with  every  major  system 
change.  But it isn’t necessary to wait until a 
new  data  center  is  built  to  improve  access.  
Systems  change  periodically,  and  it  is  quite 
possible  that  such  changes  will  provide  an 
opportunity  to  non-disruptively  implement 
access  for  broad  swaths  of  the  physical  fiber 
in  your  data  center  –  as  we’ll  discuss, 
solutions  available  on  the  market  today  can 
be implemented within the same footprint as 
existing  patch  systems,  without  drastic 
changes to physical configurations. 
 
Best  Practice  #3:  Plan  and  implement 
physical  access  when  the  symptoms 
show up, and before it is too late.   But 
outside  of  new  data  centers  and  new 
equipment,  the  organization  often  has  more 
than  justified  reason  to  implement  access. 
When symptoms of performance issues show 
up,  do  so  before  it  is  too  late.    This  may 
happen  during 
integration  of  new 
technology,  or  when  administrators  are  less 
than  confident  that  full  performance  and 
system  capabilities  of  any  system  are  being 
delivered.    On  the  other  hand,  this  may  be 
when  latency  or  general  slow  downs  occur, 
and the specific interactions behind the slow 
down  cannot  be  fully  determined.    NetNet, 

the 

any 

plant 

during 

anytime  lack  of  confidence  surfaces,  your 
visibility  isn’t  good  enough.    Instead  of  wild 
reaction, realize the lack of visibility makes it 
clear  that  better  access  is  needed,  and  begin 
planning  to  introduce  better  access  into  the 
physical 
available 
maintenance windows. 
 
With this in mind, we’ve selected one vendor 
from  which  to  more  closely  examine  what  is 
available  in  TAP  technology  today.    We’ll 
highlight Virtual Instruments, as they bring a 
unique  selection  of  both  TAP  and  analysis 
technology to the table.  At the end of the day 
though,  we  believe  key  questions  remain  in 
many  administrator’s  minds  about  how  and 
why  to  tap  infrastructures.    Following  a 
review  of  Virtual  Instrument’s  capabilities, 
we’ll  examine  how  the  Virtual  Instruments 
technology  should  be  brought 
into  an 
infrastructure  by  addressing 
the  most 
common  questions  about  taps  that  we 
regularly  field  from  today’s  data  center 
practitioners. 
 
Focus on Virtual Instruments 
TAPs 
Virtual  Instruments,  based  in  Scotts  Valley, 
CA was spun out of Finisar in 2008 and is a 
recognized  leader  in  SAN  monitoring  and 
analysis solutions.  They primarily sell virtual 
infrastructure  optimization  (VIO)  solutions 
to  companies  with 
large  SANs  running 
business-critical applications.  Their primary 
products  include  VirtualWisdom,  a  software 
monitoring  and  analysis  solution,  and 
SANInsight,  their  hardware  solutions  for 
SAN instrumentation and monitoring.    
 

87 Elm Street, Suite 900     Hopkinton, MA  01748      Tel:  508-435-5040    Fax:  508-435-1530      www.tanejagroup.com 

Copyright© The TANEJA Group, Inc. 2010. All Rights Reserved 

 

4 of 9 

 
 

S O L U T I O N   P R O F I L E 

to 

systems 

accompany 

Virtual Instruments has long been providing 
sophisticated  analysis  and  management 
solutions  for  the  enterprise  infrastructure  – 
ranging  from  the  virtual  infrastructure  to  a 
sophisticated  and  time  tested  platform  for 
SAN instrumentation. 
 
SANInsight Tap Patch Panel System 
In  April  of  2010,  Virtual  Instruments 
introduced  a  comprehensive  line  of  physical 
access 
their 
monitoring  systems.    Those  products  are 
patch-integrated Traffic Access Points (TAPs) 
for  all  manner  of  fiber  fabrics  -  50  and 
62.5um  multimode  and  9um  single  mode.  
Under  the  solution  set  name  of  SANInsight 
Tap  Patch  Panel  Systems,  this  product  line 
includes  panels  and  accompanying  optical 
TAP  cassettes  or  adapter  plates  (cassettes 
that  are  interchangeable  with  other  vendor 
adapter  plates).    Virtual  Instrument’s  TAP 
Patch Cassettes are available with a mix of LC 
and  MT  connectors  for  the  live,  patch,  and 
TAP  connections;  the  number  of  fibers  per 
Cassette  varies  with  the  connector  type.  The 
densest configuration uses MT connectors for 
both trunk and TAP connections, supporting 
24  live  fibers  (12  duplex  links)  per  cassette. 
At  96 
this 
configuration  matches  the  density  of  the 
most efficient patch-only shelves. 
 
While  the  pure  basics  of  being  able  to  get 
access when it is needed in our view justifies 
integrating  TAPs  as  a  best  practice,  the 
technical benefits of integrating TAPs go way 
beyond this.  An integrated Tap Patch System 
works  with  all  fabric  material  –  single  and 
multi-mode up to 10Gbps specifications, and 
provides  lossless  access  to  the  full  physical 
fiber  with  zero  latency  introduced.    In  turn, 

fibers  per  1U  rack  shelf, 

organizations 

can 

when  paired  with  the  right  analysis  tools 
such  as  Virtual  Instrument’s  NetWisdom  or 
VirtualWisdom, 
see 
everything  from  bad  connection  indications 
at  the  FC0  layer  up  to  individual  SCSI 
transactions in the upper layers, empowering 
complete SAN optimization. 
 
Differentiation in Integration 
With that kind of physical access in place, all 
it  takes  is  integration  with  the  right  analysis 
and  monitoring  tools  to  greatly  extend  the 
management 
troubleshooting 
capabilities within an infrastructure.  And in 
this  category,  the  SANInsight  Tap  Patch 
Panel  System  is  truly  differentiated,  as  it 
comes  from  the  same  vendor  who  is  behind 
the  considerable  reputation  and  longevity  of 
the  only  well-recognized 
fiber  analysis 
platform around – NetWisdom.  NetWisdom 
and 
instantiation, 
VirtualWisdom, 
a 
sophisticated,  distributable  management 
platform 
fiber 
infrastructure  and  reconstruct  application-
level  interactions  across  the  infrastructure.  
This allows them to identify problems in real-
time, collect trending information, and serve 
up  a  comprehensive  set  of  dashboards  to 
improve the monitoring and management for 
all of the key systems in an enterprise.  Over 
the  years,  we  have 
time  and  again 
encountered  a 
list  of  NetWisdom 
customers.    They  consistently  have  concrete 
evidence  that  NetWisdom  helps  with  their 
most significant challenges, including: 
(cid:1)  Providing 

that  can  peer 

instrumentation 

next-generation 

to  ensure 

give 

companies 

into  a 

its 

and 

long 

optimal infrastructure performance 

(cid:1)  Reducing troubleshooting time and effort 
– as well time to problem resolution – to 
a fraction of what was required before. 

87 Elm Street, Suite 900     Hopkinton, MA  01748      Tel:  508-435-5040    Fax:  508-435-1530      www.tanejagroup.com 

Copyright© The TANEJA Group, Inc. 2010. All Rights Reserved 

 

5 of 9 

 
 

S O L U T I O N   P R O F I L E 

(cid:1)  Providing  monitoring  and  utilization 
trending  that  helps  lower  OPEX  and 
CAPEX  costs  by  enabling 
strategic 
planning 
infrastructure 
purchases,  both  for  storage  and  SAN 
equipment. 

for  optimal 

through 

 
Those  capabilities  along  with  massively 
improved  physical  access 
the 
SANInsight  Tap  Patch  Panel  System  add  up 
to cost of ownership impacts that are nothing 
less than highly significant. 
 
Integrating Tap Patch Panel Systems 
Following  our  best  practices,  when  it  comes 
to putting a Tap Patch Panel System in place, 
new  datacenter  buildups  or 
large  scale 
refreshes  can  make  use  of  TAP  Patch 
components  in  Virtual  Instrument’s  own 
shelves.    But  for  nearly  any  use,  including 
existing physical plants, custom cassettes are 
available  by  special  order 
for  retrofit 
installation  into  existing  installed  shelves  in 
live  environments,  where  matching 
the 
existing cabling design and density is critical 
to minimizing disruption.  
 
One  example:  LGX-compatible  cassettes  for 
the  densest,  fully-populated  LC-LC  288  4U 
panels  where  TAP  output  is  accommodated 
over  jacketed  ribbon  cables  that  are  broken 
out 
for 
monitoring connectivity.  For connectivity in 
less  dense  panels 
that  have  sufficient 
available  mounting  space,  retrofit  cassettes 
will  simply  add  additional  LC  adapters  for 
the TAP outputs. 
Using 
enable 
organizations  to  pursue  our  best  practice 
recommendations in any scenario.  
 

connectors 

separately 

solutions 

such 

can 

to  LC 

Strategic Considerations 
As  we  talk  to  end  users  about  the  potential 
issues  lurking  beneath  the  surface  of  their 
fiber  networks,  and  why  physical  access 
should  be  a  prioritized  pursuit,  we 
consistently 
find  ourselves  addressing  a 
number of common questions.  Let’s explore 
the  most  significant  of  these  questions  that 
call  out  the  strategic  importance  of  insight 
into  the  fiber  foundations  of  the  enterprise.  
In  our  mind,  every  data  center  architect 
should  consider  these  questions  during  the 
design  of  the  physical  cable  plant  behind 
their fiber networks. 
 
Q: Why do I need physical access into 
my cabling infrastructure? 
In our view, physical access into fiber cabling 
plants should be considered nothing short of 
an industry best practice in order to confirm 
optimal  operations,  diagnose  root  causes, 
resolve  problems  and  optimize  performance 
within  today’s  complex  infrastructures,  well 
beyond  the  capabilities  of  sniffers  and 
analysis  tools  restricted  to  limited  ports  of 
access  and  the  port  mirroring  capabilities  of 
network  devices,  especially  when  unused 
ports are a rarity in today’s dense and highly 
oversubscribed fabrics. 
 
In  the  world  of  high  performance  fiber,  it 
takes  access  to  ensure  that  everything  is 
operating  smoothly.    In  directly  monitored 
environments, it is common that we see new 
equipment  implementations  suffering  from 
misconfigurations 
incompatibilities.  
Undetected,  misconfigurations  can  become 
entrenched  in  an  environment,  and  lead  to 
additional 
or 
replacements  well  before  they  are  needed.  

equipment 

purchases 

and 

87 Elm Street, Suite 900     Hopkinton, MA  01748      Tel:  508-435-5040    Fax:  508-435-1530      www.tanejagroup.com 

Copyright© The TANEJA Group, Inc. 2010. All Rights Reserved 

 

6 of 9 

 
 

S O L U T I O N   P R O F I L E 

Even  worse,  in  this  critical  infrastructure 
within  the  enterprise,  lack  of  access  may 
mean  you  are  left  without  tools  to  resolve 
trouble  with  anything  less  than  disruptive 
exercises  that  may  well  end  up  as  extended, 
uninformed  guesswork  to  resolve  problems.  
And just as importantly, lack of access leaves 
you without the tools to understand and plan 
for the long-term needs of your applications.  
 
Q: Can I afford physical access? 
With products like Virtual Instruments TAPs, 
enterprises  can  build  in  access  in  typical 
patch  panel 
locations  without  additional 
space or power requirements, minimal signal 
deterioration,  and  a  minimal  incremental 
cost.    Moreover,  those  minimal  incremental 
costs  are  especially  negligible  when  weighed 
against  the  long  term  cost  implications  of 
insufficient access.  What are those costs? As 
we  survey  the  enterprise  customers  for  the 
issues they are facing in their infrastructure, 
limited  visibility  and  access  is  reflected  in 
indirect costs incurred in 3 dimensions. 
1.  Lack  of  access  costs  you 
in 

lower 

lost 
capabilities. 
  This  first  shows  up  in 
customer’s  limited  ability  to  extract  and 
validate  promised  performance  from  key 
technology  systems.    With  no  ability  to 
see  into  fabrics,  minor  misconfigurations 
may  mean  that  realized  performance  is 
much 
promised 
performance 
be 
realizing.    This  may  be  a  correctable 
condition,  but  only  if  configurations  can 
be  altered.    In  other  cases,  this  may  be 
entirely a matter of false advertising, and 
having  access  and  the  accompanying 
visibility may provide the customer with a 
tool  to  hold  the  vendor’s  feet  to  the  fire, 
and negotiate contractual or new solution 

customers 

should 

than 

the 

2.  Lack  of  capabilities  costs  you 

remedies.    Without  visibility,  less  than 
promised  performance  can  be  common, 
and  leads  many  customers  to  add  or 
replace  key  systems,  such  as  storage 
arrays,  well  before  they’ve  fully  utilized 
what they bought.  

limited 

in 
troubleshooting  time,  effort,  and  delays.  
The  second  case  where  costs  show  up  is 
around 
troubleshooting 
capabilities.    As  we’ve  discussed,  without 
physical access, valuable information may 
not  be  visible  to  diagnostic  tools,  and 
we’ve  frequently  observed  cases  where 
troubleshooting  effort  is  exponentially 
increased  because  of 
the  difficulty 
involved in identifying where and how to 
access a fabric.  Moreover, in the worst of 
cases,  such  access  may  require  an 
operational  outage.    In  the  best  of  these 
worst  cases,  such  an  outage  is  planned, 
but  we  have  many  times  heard  tales  of 
physical  access  attempts  –  unplugged 
cables,  or  changed  device  configurations 
–  accidentally  disrupting  production 
systems.  When  such  events  happen  in 
highly  utilized  production  environments, 
they  can  have  significant 
impact  on 
revenue  generating  or  key  supporting 
platforms. 

the 

into 

3.  Lack of access costs you in planning and 
strategic  management.    Third,  limited 
the  consequent  reduced 
access  and 
infrastructure  can 
visibility 
in 
indirectly  create  costs 
long-term 
management  and  planning. 
  Limited 
leave  enterprises 
visibility  can  easily 
without 
utilization 
trending 
data.  
Without  an  awareness  of  infrastructure 
growth  and  demand 
resources, 
enterprises  will  typically  overprovision 

for 

87 Elm Street, Suite 900     Hopkinton, MA  01748      Tel:  508-435-5040    Fax:  508-435-1530      www.tanejagroup.com 

Copyright© The TANEJA Group, Inc. 2010. All Rights Reserved 

 

7 of 9 

 
 

S O L U T I O N   P R O F I L E 

their  infrastructure  (often  by  factors  of  5 
to  10 
times),  unnecessarily  wasting 
valuable  capital  and  operating  costs.  
With  access  to  the  right  data,  SAN 
switching  expenses 
can  be  greatly 
reduced  and  lower  cost  storage  can  be 
deployed  as  instrumentation  will  enable 
SAN  managers  to  guarantee  their  SLAs 
when 
lower 
performance storage.  

lower 

using 

cost, 

the 

their 

specifics 

 
We  believe  underutilized  systems,  increased 
management  time  and  effort,  and  poor 
infrastructure  performance  over  time  can 
easily  exceed  the  cost  of  even  far  reaching 
physical  access  designs. 
  For  customers 
examining  these  costs  in  greater  detail  and 
using 
own 
of 
infrastructure,  we  believe 
the  penalties 
incurred  by  lack  of  physical  access  to  key 
fabrics  will  far  outweigh  the  costs  of  even 
comprehensive  solutions  on  the  market 
today. 
 
Q:  Will  physical  access  compromise 
the  simplicity  and  efficiency  of  my 
cabling infrastructure? 
TAPs  in  the  market  today,  such  as  Virtual 
Instrument’s TAPs, are near lossless and can 
deliver  similar  functionality  and  simplicity 
when  compared  to  regular  cabling  plant 
patch panels that have long been accepted as 
best  practice.    In  fact,  using  the  Tap  Patch 
Panel  System,  the  simplicity  of  integrated 
and  modular  TAP  and  patch  panels  can 
actually  improve  upon  legacy  patch  panels, 
and  allow  users  to  easily  upgrade  or  change 
connections for small subsets of cables, while 
preserving  physical  access.    In  our  view,  the 
strategic  use  of  TAPs  throughout  key  fabrics 

into 

that  TAPs  are  built 

in the infrastructure is every bit as important 
a best practice as the use of patch panels.   
 
Q: Where should I tap? 
Understanding  where  to  tap,  and  making 
sure 
the 
infrastructure at all the right points, takes an 
understanding  of 
the  applications  and 
systems 
that  are  associated  with  your 
infrastructure, and should be an exercise that 
is  elevated  well  beyond  where  it  has  been 
considered  in  the  past;  a  concern  of  solely 
physical  layer  specialists.  With  the  right 
multi-disciplinary  stakeholders  at  the  table, 
it  is  our  opinion  that  accessibility  should  be 
looked  at  as  a  standard  for  the  enterprise, 
and should be incorporated in all new system 
and storage deployments.   
 
Moreover,  for  existing  infrastructure,  the 
possibilities  on  how  to  get  to  this  ideal  are 
endless,  and  we  recommend  working  closely 
with  physical  plant  partners  who  also 
understand  data 
  Significant 
infrastructure  evolution  is  well  underway  in 
the  enterprise  today,  with  data  centers 
growing  to  greater  scale  than  ever  before.  
While  ideally  TAPs  should  be  installed  near 
core  directors  for  more  effective  access,  for 
organizations  adding  dense  racks  of  servers 
or  pockets  of  high  performance  servers,  we 
can  even  see  opportunities 
to  deploy 
solutions  like  the  SANInsight  Tap  Patch 
Panel  System  chassis  as  a  top  of  rack 
patching  and  TAP  panel,  along  with 
distributed, 
rack-integrated  monitoring 
probes.  This would integrate TAPs gradually, 
following  a  pattern  similar  to  best  practices 
for 
the 
enterprise. 
 

integrating  new 

systems. 

fabrics 

into 

87 Elm Street, Suite 900     Hopkinton, MA  01748      Tel:  508-435-5040    Fax:  508-435-1530      www.tanejagroup.com 

Copyright© The TANEJA Group, Inc. 2010. All Rights Reserved 

 

8 of 9 

 
 

S O L U T I O N   P R O F I L E 

to  gain 

is 

TAPs 

alongside 

analysis 

solutions 

those 
set 

to  not  build  access 

into 

that  make  up  the  real  muscle  behind 
enterprise IT. 
 
Moreover,  with 
like  Virtual 
Instruments  Tap  Patch  System  on 
the 
market,  there  simply 
isn’t  a  reasonable 
excuse 
the 
infrastructure.    The  cost  is  negligible,  and 
dwarfed  by  the  tremendous  impact  that 
access  can  have  in  the  form  of  extracting 
maximum  infrastructure  use,  and  massively 
reducing  the  time  and  effort  involved  in 
troubleshooting  as  well  as  the  operational 
and strategic, long term management of that 
infrastructure.    A  look  around  the  industry 
makes  it  clear  that  these  capabilities  are  at 
the  very  center  of  IT  best  practices  today.  
Incident  management?    Yes,  pure  visibility 
delivers  massively  reduced  time  and  effort.  
Capacity  management?    Yes,  pure  visibility 
delivers 
alternative 
(guesstimates  drawn  from  less  insightful 
tools).    Problem  management?    Yes,  pure 
insight gives you the toolset to optimize away 
recurrent  issues.    And  the  list  goes  on.    In 
today’s  service-driven  enterprise  IT  practice, 
visibility 
  For 
organizations  realizing  this,  it  is  clear  that 
this  is  a  strategic  consideration,  and  that 
there  simply  must  be  long  term,  intentional 
planning  to  better  implement  access  and 
visibility with each and every IT effort. 

Q: What should I tap with? 
Look for a tapping solution set from a vendor 
who  can also help assess your infrastructure 
and give you insight on where to tap and how 
intelligence  by 
you’re  going 
a 
leveraging 
sophisticated 
and 
of 
  In  this  regard, 
management  solutions. 
Virtual 
Instruments 
distinctly 
differentiated  as  they  bring  both  intelligent 
software  –  the  only  solution  on  the  market 
truly  capable  of  peering  deep  into  a  Fibre 
Channel  SAN  –  along  with  a  comprehensive 
set  of  tapping  solutions  that  can  provide 
physical access anywhere in an infrastructure 
and  within  the  same  efficient  footprint  that 
your current cabling plant utilizes.  
 
Taneja Group Opinion 
It  is  clear  to  us  that  considering  visibility 
within  next  generation  data  centers  is  more 
important than ever.  In fact, we’re confident 
that neglecting the full consideration of how 
to  peer  into  the  performance  behind  a 
consolidated,  high  performance  data  center 
will significantly limit the capabilities of that 
data  center.    For  the  strategic  enterprise, 
those  considerations  should  be  top  of  mind 
during  any  significant  data  center  activity 
that  presents  the  opportunity  to  open  up  a 
portal into the mission critical fiber networks 
 
 
 
                                                   
. NOTICE:  The information and product recommendations made by the TANEJA GROUP are based upon public information and sources 
and  may  also  include  personal  opinions  both  of  the  TANEJA  GROUP  and  others,  all  of  which  we  believe  to  be  accurate  and  reliable. 
However, as market conditions change and not within our control, the information and recommendations are made without warranty of 
any kind. All product names used and mentioned herein are the trademarks of their respective owners. The TANEJA GROUP, Inc. assumes 
no  responsibility  or  liability  for  any  damages  whatsoever  (including  incidental,  consequential  or  otherwise),  caused  by  your  use  of,  or 
reliance upon, the information and recommendations presented herein, nor for any inadvertent errors which may appear in this document. 

is  simply  a  must  have. 

better 

than 

the 

.

87 Elm Street, Suite 900     Hopkinton, MA  01748      Tel:  508-435-5040    Fax:  508-435-1530      www.tanejagroup.com 

Copyright© The TANEJA Group, Inc. 2010. All Rights Reserved 

 

9 of 9 

