 
 
 
 
WHITE PAPER 

 

vce.com

VCE™ MANUFACTURING 

 

 
 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

VCE Confidential 

 

 

 

Table of Contents 

Challenges............................................................................................................3	  
Fully-Integrated Manufacturing ..........................................................................4	  
Optimized Cable Design And Layout.................................................................4	  
Power And Cooling Optimizations.....................................................................5	  
Environmental Component Testing And System Burn-In................................6	  
Logical-Build Process .........................................................................................7	  
Certification Process...........................................................................................8	  
Standardized process monitored by independent quality assurance (QA) function ....................... 9	  
World-class talent and depth of resources...................................................................................... 9	  
Six Sigma and Lean Manufacturing methodologies...................................................................... 10	  
Build Documentation.........................................................................................10	  
Summary.............................................................................................................10	  
The following images show the various stages of the final build process.................................................. 11	  

 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

VCE Confidential 

 

2 

 

 

The value of the VCE manufacturing process to customers can sometimes be hard  
to articulate without customers touring a VCE manufacturing facility. This document 
helps to fill that gap and serves to educate customers on the value of the VCE 
manufacturing process. 

Challenges 
Challenges faced today by IT professionals and companies include: 
  Staff – Lack of in-house staff trained in manufacturing, assembly, and testing of Vblock™  

Systems solutions. 

  Time – Business agility and time to value can vary greatly across organizations. Slower build times 
erodes confidence in IT departments, delays application deployments, and results in lost revenue. 

  Reliability and risk reduction – Fractured infrastructure teams who rarely build and deploy systems are 
not proficient at optimizing the build process. This leads to delays and inconsistent or poor build quality.  

The VCE manufacturing process addresses these challenges and improves business agility and quality while 
lowering risk and TCO. 

 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

VCE Confidential 

 

3 

 

 

Fully-Integrated Manufacturing 
Vblock Systems solutions are fully-integrated, qualified, configured, tested, and optimized in the factory and are 
shipped to customers as a single product. Physical and logical builds are completed in the factory, allowing for 
faster on-site deployment times. Business agility is improved since Vblock Systems ship within 45 days of 
ordering, and customers are able to run operational workloads within 48 hours of delivery. 

The VCE manufacturing facilities have a unique, direct connection with component suppliers and can quickly and 
completely resolve integration issues that would be major problems for on-site integration. For example, faulty 
components discovered during the build are immediately replaced, avoiding days and weeks of delay all too 
common in the field.  

 

Optimized Cable Design And Layout 
VCE engineers design for optimal cable management to minimize complexity, increase airflow, and allow for easy 
access to components for replacement and/or upgrades. Cables are color-coded and clearly labeled. The cabling 
design, including cable type, lengths, routing, bend radius, and stress-relief management, has been optimized 
through an iterative process that includes thousands of Vblock System builds. VCE cabling technicians are trained 
to follow best-practice standards for handling and installing all types of cabling, have years of experience, and 
have the advantage of a workspace specifically designed for the process. Individuals who infrequently build 
converged infrastructure systems or reference architecture designs cannot easily replicate this level of quality.  

Optimized cable design also simplifies system expansions and upgrades by allowing enough room to access, 
remove, add, or replace infrastructure components. Vblock Systems leave the floor fully-cabled and require only a 
few clearly-marked and pre-tested connections (power and network) to be performed on site. Intercabinet cables 
are clearly labeled and are grouped and bundled by destination to simplify deployment and minimize cable 
handling on site.  

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

VCE Confidential 

 

4 

 

 

Rear of Vblock Systems cabinet showing optimized cable design 

 

Power And Cooling Optimizations 
Point-of-use storage power outlet units (POUs) are installed at the factory to support the maximum scale  
points of a Vblock System configuration. Cabinet design and placement of cabling, networking, compute,  
and storage components is optimized to ensure the best thermal distribution and cooling airflow and to reduce 
power consumption. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

VCE Confidential 

 

5 

 

 

Environmental Component Testing And System Burn-In 
All Vblock Systems storage components are thoroughly tested and subjected to an environmental stress 
screening process that includes vibration and thermal characteristics in the factory. This involves stress testing 
individual components before they are integrated in a Vblock System. All storage system components are tested 
under extreme temperatures. The factory includes specifically-designed rooms where systems burn-in under 
extreme temperatures.  

Environmental test chambers are cycled between a low temperature of 38 degrees Fahrenheit to a high of 104 
degress Fahrenheit ,while fully-assembled and operational [VMAX] systems are dynamically tested under extreme 
operational loads. 

Vblock Systems are subjected to several days of fully-powered operation prior to shipment to detect early-life 
failures, which can occur during the initial “burn-in.”  

This reduces the customer’s risk of failure and speeds time-to-value. Component failures are exposed before the 
Vblock System is shipped. 

Environmental test chamber 

 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

VCE Confidential 

 

6 

 

 

Logical-Build Process 

 

Each Vblock System is logically configured to meet specific customer requirements defined for the Professional 
Service logical-build team in a logical configuration survey (LCS). Developed with customers, the LCS helps to 
ensure that each Vblock System is built based on client workload characteristics and will yield the needed scale 
and performance characteristics for each application to perform optimally in a production environment.  

Specially-trained and experienced professional services engineers perform the logical-build process, each 
accustomed to performing all of the detailed steps to configure and test the broad portfolio of VCE products. All 
software, configuration procedures, and settings are documented and updated regularly to guarantee system 
stability, performance, and compliance with tested and verified designs. All tested and approved patches and 
updates are installed according to the latest configuration matrix to make every Vblock System fully updated and 
compliant with the VCE Life Cycle Assurance system. 

Relying on the experience of thousands of configuration builds and the close association of VCE, Cisco, EMC, 
and VMware support, even the largest and most complex Vblock Systems configurations are completed efficiently 
and accurately, according to documented requirements. Any problems encountered are quickly resolved by 
subject-matter experts and are subjected to root-cause analysis. 

The VCE logical-build team has well-exercised and specialized skills needed to stay current and well-versed in all 
of the configuration requirements for compute, network, and storage components. This skill set, which is 
becoming increasingly rare in the typical data center, allows the logical-build team to create application-ready 
infrastructures and enable backup, replication, workload balancing, seamless business continuity, and disaster 
recovery. Factory-completed logical builds is one of the key reasons Vblock Systems customers can typically start 
running operational workloads within 48 hours of receiving their systems. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

VCE Confidential 

 

7 

 

 

Certification Process 

 

VCE manufacturing facilities are certified to meet requirements of ISO 9001 Quality Management System. 
Manufacturing sites co-located with EMC have the added advantage of ISO 140001 environmental management 
systems, and OHSAS 18001 safety and health management systems (both improve resource efficiency, reduce 
waste, and drive down costs). 

System integration in a mature manufacturing environment (continually verified by these certification audits) has 
several advantages over the uncertain conditions of on-site reference architecture builds: 

Clean, orderly, and well-equipped work areas provide an ideal workspace to eliminate problems often faced  
in the field:  

  Reduce the chance of contamination —particularly optical fiber connections, which are susceptible to 

signal degradation. These are clean spaces, maintained by the use of massive air filtration systems and 
constant surface-cleaning activities.  

  Eliminate physical damage to components or cables—equipment-handling tools, such as lifts and 
transport carts, as well as space to manage cable handling prevents mishandling (drops/shock to 
components that would exceed minimum bend radius of delicate cables (copper and fiber). 

  Prevent electrostatic discharge (ESD) damage which is often the cause of undetected component 

degradation and failure and is only avoided through attention to ESD precautions. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

VCE Confidential 

 

8 

 

 

ESD labeling on factory floor 

 

Standardized process monitored by independent quality assurance (QA) function 
  Well-documented procedures for both the build and the QA checks, continually updated to reflect 

incremental improvements to process and product. 

  Root-cause analysis of all anomalies ensures appropriate corrective actions are taken for all issues 

encountered during a build, and drives continuous improvement. 

  Consistently high quality maintained through gating inspections performed and recorded at each major 

step in the manufacturing process. 

World-class talent and depth of resources 
  Permanent, co-located staff including all required skillsets: technical program management, inventory  
and production control, assembly and test technicians, professional services engineers, logistics and 
quality assurance personnel shepherd each order through the entire process, from order validation to  
final shipment. 

  Specialized skillsets working under direct supervision and subject to quality audit and daily inspections. 

Experts in niche skills such and cable routing and dressing, system configuration and validation, 
packaging, and shipping. 

  Direct access to extensive manufacturing infrastructure and supplier support for problem resolution and 

continuous improvement activities. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

VCE Confidential 

 

9 

 

 

Six Sigma and Lean Manufacturing methodologies 
  Proven methodologies for improving efficiency, quality, and driving down costs. 

  All staff members are trained and rely on decisions based on data to ensure the best process. 

  5S manufacturing system ensures the best working environment for the job at hand. 

  Process and product improvement activities are a part of every staff member’s role. Listening to 

customers is a main source of improvement initiatives. 

Build Documentation 
Each Vblock System is built to a set of order-specific build instructions, which provide all details of materials used, 
component location, point-to-point cabling details, software licensing, and configuration details. The build 
documentation for each order is generated through a set of proprietary VCE software tools that optimize the 
component and cabling layout. As the Vblock Systems evolve and the variety of designs available increases, we 
are able to maintain consistency in layout while meeting requirements to optimize component placement for 
power distribution loading, as well as component redundancy and failover.  

During the build process, all system-specific details, such as hardware serial numbers, are collected and added to 
the build documentation set. This “as-built” documentation set is stored and available through a dynamic 
publishing system. 

This detailed document describes the location and layout of each component of the converged infrastructure 
solution. This document is extremely useful when making changes to the infrastructure, including upgrades,  
and simplifies interaction during any support activity (no need to search for model and serial numbers during  
a support call).  

Summary 

 
The VCE manufacturing process helps VCE stand out from the competition and is clearly a competitive advantage 
in selling situations. Customers should be invited to take the manufacturing tour whenever possible. If that is not 
an option, this document should be used to help sell the value of a Vblock Systems solution that is fully-tested, 
integrated, and optimized before being shipped out to a customer site. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

VCE Confidential 

 

10 

 

 

The following images show the various stages of the final build process. 

 

 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

VCE Confidential 

 

11 

 

 

 

 

 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

VCE Confidential 

 

12 

 

 

ABOUT VCE 
VCE, formed by Cisco and EMC with investments from VMware and Intel, accelerates the adoption of 
converged infrastructure and cloud-based computing models that dramatically reduce the cost of IT while 
improving time to market for our customers. VCE, through the Vblock Systems, delivers the industry's 
only fully integrated and fully virtualized cloud infrastructure system. VCE solutions are available 
through an extensive partner network, and cover horizontal applications, vertical industry offerings, and 
application development environments, allowing customers to focus on business innovation instead of 
integrating, validating, and managing IT infrastructure. 
For more information, go to vce.com. 
 
 

 

 
Copyright © 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. VCE, VCE Vision, Vblock, and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks 
of VCE Company LLC or its affiliates in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their 
respective owners. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

VCE Confidential 

 

13 

 

