 

 

Global Financial Institution 
Case Study 

Challenges:  

• 

• 

• 

Implementing new projects 
and infrastructure with a 
limited ability to determine 
the impact in uptime and 
performance 
Improving performance in a 
wide variety of virtual and 
non-virtual environments  
Diagnosing SAN problems 
with a “trial and error” 
approach 

Solution:  
• 

Virtual Instruments 
NetWisdom and professional 
services consulting 

Customer Benefits:  
• 

Helps maximize virtual 
hardware loads 
Ensures maximum application 
performance 
Gives unbiased answers to 
avoid vendor finger pointing 
Verifies vendor marketing 
claims by using to test and set 
up POCs 
Enables real time 
performance tuning 
Allows growth of the virtual 
infrastructure to include 
heavy-hitter databases on the 
same physical machine 
Provides historical 
information on new queries 
performance on databases to 
detect efficiency of queries  
and impact on performance 
Troubleshoots issues faster 
and more precisely 
Accurately scopes of the size 
of SAN operations  

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

 

 
Credit Card Issuer Deploys Virtual Instruments’ 
NetWisdom to Help Ensure Application Performance & 
Accelerate Bringing New Projects Online Faster 
Overview and IT Environment 
This Virtual Instruments customer is one of the leading credit card issuers in the US today. 
Though relatively new to the market, it has gained a strong foothold through co-branded credit 
cards and a focus on customer satisfaction.  As a result, this organization is one of the fastest 
growing institutions in the market. 
Their IT department supports multiple data centers spread throughout North America, with 
several data warehouses totaling over 35TB, generating heavy I/O workloads (over 40,000 IOPS 
sustained).  Because IT is considered a weapon against their competitors, their goal is to 
continue to push the envelope and to be more leading edge.  Projects are expected to be turned 
around quickly, while maintaining 99.99% uptime.  Storage is primarily split between tier 1 and 
tier 2 EMC arrays.  Servers mostly run AIX and Windows, but their IT department supports 
virtually every flavor of OS within their SAN. 
Because this institution considers IT to be a competitive edge, there is pressure to not only 
maintain superior customer-facing application performance and overall high application 
availability, but also to deploy the newest technologies quickly.  Existing measurement tools and 
testing methodologies were simply not up to the challenge of optimizing existing applications, 
improving customer service, and making technology leaps all at the same time. 

Solution Evaluation  
As a big EMC shop, the IT department first attempted to solve the performance monitoring issue 
by using EMC’s WLA (Workload Analyzer). WLA was not able to offer the most critical metrics.  
SANscreen (then from Onaro) was also brought in for a proof of concept, and was immediately 
eliminated from consideration for performance monitoring due to the lack of granularity it could 
provide for user experiences.  SANscreen was, however, retained for use for its core strength, 
change management. 
Virtual Instruments’ NetWisdom was the only product found to give detailed views of the 
essential SAN performance and utilization data to base decisions on, as well as troubleshooting 
performance issues.  NetWisdom clearly provided both the raw data and the polished graphing 
utilities to help solve problems. 

 

 

 

 

Global Financial Institution 
Case Study 

NetWisdom Value 
Once deployed, NetWisdom became an indispensible SAN optimization tool for the team.  It’s 
been used to troubleshoot large data warehouse performance issues, solve an SRDF replication 
issue, verify new vendor’s marketing claims, test various configuration settings for a new OS 
platform, and even monitor for failing SFPs. 
NetWisdom has enabled accelerated deployments by providing real-time visibility to rollouts; to 
ensure that all is performing as expected, with no mis-configurations or version 
incompatibilities.  By providing measurements in a de-duplication proof of concept, IT was able 
to validate this new technology without negatively impacting the SAN infrastructure. 
On an ongoing basis, the IT department has reduced both the number of trouble tickets and has 
resolved issues much faster.  For instance, by measuring the historical trends of database 
queries on applications, performance problems that may have eventually occurred have been 
averted.  By supplying unbiased, third-party metrics and analysis to the key SAN vendors, finger 
pointing has effectively been eliminated. 

NetWisdom Example Use Case 
The backup administrator was complaining that his level zero backups of a particular system 
were taking a long time to complete. He had consulted with the application owner and they had 
determined that the best time to run a backup would be after 7pm and before 2am. Users 
typically would leave around 5:30-6pm, and a batch processing schedule would kick off around 
2am. Any extra disk activity between 7pm and 2am should not face any contention for disk IO. 
After using NetWisdom, the IT department learned that the quiet time was from 11pm-6am. It 
turned out that users were queuing up one final command, hitting enter, and leaving for the 
day. This increased load would run until about 10:30pm. Batch processing, as it turns out, was 
relatively light on the disks themselves. The backup administrator was able to reduce his backup 
window by sliding the backup times into the quiet disk periods. 

NetWisdom Going Forward 
The near-term plan for NetWisdom includes rolling out more software and Fiber Channel probes 
to specifically and directly monitor the most critical databases.  By instrumenting WAN links, IT 
will be able to more accurately predict replication needs.  Finally, the NOC will begin to use the 
NetWisdom Dashboard to monitor and view SAN performance in real-time. 

NetWisdom Experience 
According to the SAN team, NetWisdom is the most used and the single most useful tool in their 
storage management tool-bag.  Other IT teams are requesting read access to it, and it has 
“saved countless hours of troubleshooting, and given the whole department a new direction in 
improving performance”. 

Lessons Learned … the Customer Perspective 
According to the SAN team, “your first goal is to understand what your goals are”.   You have to 
have a clear understanding of what results your upper management is seeking.  What’s 
important?  Is it agility, cost effectiveness, stability, or ultimately, application performance?  
With those metrics in mind, you can utilize NetWisdom to proactively manage your 
environment.   
A basic trick is to “arm yourself with as much information as possible”.  It’s all too common to 
see SANs that are over-designed on purpose, and usually over-provisioned because of a lack of 
information and data about what is truly going on within your infrastructure).  It’s a sad fact that 
the SAN guys don’t have all the magical tools that our IP network brothers get.  NetWisdom can 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

“I must show our SAN’s 

performance and pitfalls to 
the CIO every quarter.  I use 
only NetWisdom to prepare 

that report.” 

“My organization has used 

NetWisdom to solve 

countless issues. Each issue 
has more than paid for its 

purchase.” 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

 

 

Global Financial Institution 
Case Study 

help. Knowing when your ever growing demand from a specific server actually requires an 
additional HBA is invaluable.  Being able to see it’s traffic pattern (on the SAN), and to see its 
heavy traffic moments and its less intensive moments can mean the difference between a level0 
backup failing and it completing within the backup window without investing in another HBA 
(and more cables, and another switch port).   
According to Ryan Perkowski, the SAN Manager, “The NetWisdom experience will seem a bit 
odd at first, having the type and amount of information at your fingertips.  Once you get over 
the ‘drinking from a fire-hose‘ feeling, you instantly start to see its power.  Trending out usage, 
actually seeing a non-biased response time on exchanges, or even just showing block sizes on 
the SAN in real-time is invaluable as you attempt to squeak out a little more performance every 
day.”   
Managing and optimizing a SAN is a daunting task at best.  SANs grow fast, are hard to maintain, 
and consume a big percentage of the overall IT budget.   Ryan adds, “Virtual Instruments’ 
NetWisdom is a must in any SAN. There are metrics gathered and data stored by NetWisdom 
that other groups already take for granted. NetWisdom has given us the ability to participate as 
a peer with these other groups during root cause analysis sessions. Our only regret is not 
installing it sooner, as its historical data and trending ability would have greatly improved our 
quarterly review sessions”. 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

“Virtual Instruments’ 

NetWisdom is a must in any 
SAN. The kinds of metrics 

gathered and data stored by 

NetWisdom are already 

taken for granted by other IT 

groups. NetWisdom has 
given me the ability to 

participate as a peer with 
these other groups during 

root cause analysis 

sessions.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

100 Enterprise Way, Suite C-3  
Scotts Valley, CA 95066  
 
Phone: 831-439-4000  
 
Sales Information  
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Phone: 831-439-4080  
 
Customer Support  
support@virtualinstruments.com  
www.virtualinstruments.com 
 
 
©2009 Virtual Instruments. All rights 
reserved. Features and specifications are 
subject to change without notice 6/09 
 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

