 

NORTH AMERICAN FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTION CASE STUDY 

 

Challenges:  

• 

• 

Finding  contributing issues 
and root cause of problems 
that impact performance and 
availability 

Server / network / storage/ 
application performance 
problem diagnosis 

Solution:  

• 

Virtual Instruments SAN 
Health Audit discovered 
several discrete issues that, 
once uncovered, enabled the 
customer to take measures to 
avoid SAN related slowdowns 
or even outages 

 Benefits:  

Introduced best practices to 
help eliminate wasted staff 
time finger-pointing at 
vendors 

Gave IT operations staff the 
data to know where to spend 
time for the best payback 

Identified the most likely 
causes of application 
slowdowns 

Enabled the customer to 
eliminate configuration 
problems that could have led 
to application unavailability 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Virtual Instruments SAN Health Audit Brings SAN Maturity 
Best Practices to a Leading Financial Institution 

Company Overview  
Established over 100 years ago, this Financial Group serves more than 7 million 
personal, commercial, corporate and institutional customers in North America and 
internationally. Through its various operating divisions, including commercial and 
personal banking and wealth management, the institution strives to offer a great 
customer experience.   
IT Environment  
This company’s data center houses multi-petabytes of data, with additional storage in 
secondary and disaster recovery sites.  Storage is supplied primarily by EMC, with 
director-class switches by Brocade.   
Challenges and Solutions Summary 
This multi-national institution was experiencing an application slowdown related to its 
trading application.  It allocated dozens of company and vendor resources, a “tiger 
team” that met every day during market open and market close, for many months. 
•  Customer was dealing with application latency (response time) issues that it 

suspected were storage-related. 

•  Customer had worked closely but unsuccessfully with its storage partners in an 

effort to determine the root cause of these performance issues for several months.  
The storage partners, working collaboratively, had not identified any significant 
SAN- or storage-related issues that correlated with the observed issues. 

Virtual Instruments shipped in a VirtualWisdom PAK (Portable Assessment Kit), and 
tapped storage links using SANInsight TAPs and performed a detailed SAN Health Audit 

1 

 

 

NORTH AMERICAN FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTION CASE STUDY 

 

Professional Services engagement.  During that period, the team, including the 
customer’s engineering and operations personnel and Virtual Instruments met to 
review the metrics provided by VirtualWisdom and to discuss the ongoing analysis.  
While the problem itself didn’t occur during the time that VI instrumentation was in 
use, there were several anomalies observed in the environment that helped explain 
why it is prone to outages should other anomalies arise.  
Virtual Instruments often finds that storage-related outages and/or performance 
incidents are not caused by a single issue but are the result of multiple, seemingly 
unrelated issues in the environment. The net result is that the SAN infrastructure, 
running in a somewhat vulnerable state is not able to deal with additional issues as 
they arise resulting in outages or “brownouts”.  Through this services engagement, the 
customer learned best practices related to identifying risk areas that when taken in 
total, often result in application performance problems. 
Problems found 
The customer engaged with Virtual Instruments to help find multiple SAN-related 
problems, remediate them, and just as importantly, provide guidance to help prevent 
similar problems from recurring in the future.  VirtualWisdom’s unique ability to 
measure, capture, and analyze SAN events, I/O workload and transaction latency was 
deemed essential to solve this application slowdown. 
•  Connectivity and Errors 

 

 

 

 

 

“Two weeks ago, if a 

storage resource issue was 
brought to the tiger team, it 
would take almost an entire 
afternoon to correlate the 
data needed to determine 

next steps in the 

troubleshooting process, 
and again the next day if 
there was a recurrence. 
With a tool like Virtual 

Wisdom, that process takes 

a matter of minutes. 

VirtualWisdom has given us 

the chance to monitor in 

real time, pause the activity 
seen and scroll through all 
the different dashboards to 
determine how that issue 

correlates across the 

infrastructure.” 

SAN Manager 
Customer IT 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Errors in the SAN can cause significant impact to performance and latency.  There 
were several areas of concern found that could affect overall performance and 
reliability of the environment. An excessive number of SCSI inquiries were being 
made by many of the servers. While inquiries are a normal part of the reboot and 
device discovery process, they are usually not a normal part of steady state 
operations. In many five-minute time periods there were as many as 1,000 inquires 
per server. The concern was that inquiries at this level would not be well-tolerated 
by some storage arrays and would lead to poor and unpredictable performance.   
It was also noted that several physical layer problems were resolved during the 
analysis period. There were a number of Class 3 Discards, CRC Errors, SCSI Check 
Condition, Accepts and Aborts identified during this assessment.  Servers and 
applications were being forced to retransmit data affecting overall performance 
and health of the environment.  This added additional load and increased 
congestion in the fabric. 
Virtual Instruments suggested that the links experiencing CRC’s should have the 
SFP’s and cables examined for issues and replaced as needed. Many ISL’s and 
storage ports were experiencing Class 3 Discards while utilization levels were low. 
This behavior is indicative of slow draining devices in the environment. Virtual 
Instruments recommended that going forward, VirtualWisdom ProbeFCX will be 
used to identify and properly tune HBA settings and configurations to avoid these 
problems. Often, properly configuring Queue Depth settings, avoiding mixing link 
rates and alerting when high numbers of exchanges are pending can eliminate 
these issues.  The SCSI Check Condition Errors appeared to be coming from the 

2 

 

several server HBAs.  Virtual Instruments recommended that the HBA and storage 
vendors should be engaged to review these errors in greater detail. 

•  Configuration 

Ensuring that redundant data paths are functioning as intended is important to 
availability and fault tolerance. There were over 1,000 HBAs that were visible to 
VirtualWisdom.  Of those, 11% were operating in a balanced active/active mode.  
5% were identified as acting in an Active/Passive mode.  35% of HBAs were 
identified as Single, meaning that no secondary data path could be identified for 
many of the servers on the SAN.  There also were many servers where it appeared 
that all of the HBAs were attached to the same switch which could result in failures 
if the switch or fabric encountered errors.  

Single

No Nickname

Balanced

Imbalanced

Active/Passive

     

Multi-pathing 

 

•  Capacity Planning 

The SAN was largely underutilized with some areas of congestion. 7% of the storage 
ports had 51% of the traffic. This means that 93% of the storage ports had the other 
half of the traffic.   Some of the ISLs were found to peak above 50%.  If one of the 
paths were to fail, then the ISL peer would struggle to meet the expected 
performance requirement, which could result in degraded performance, increased 
latency and possibly an outage.  There were some servers that were responsible for 
the majority of the traffic in the data center. The remaining portion of the 
environment could be optimized to reduce the number of storage ports by 
consolidating them. 

VirtualWisdom Value 
The VirtualWisdom SAN Health Audit is a key step in SAN maturity. It offers an initial 
baseline of the environment so progress can be tracked as improvements and 
optimization changes to the environment are made.  And it provides a blueprint for 
avoiding SAN-related slowdowns.  This analysis contains many findings and 
recommendations that are typical for initial SAN instrumentation and should not be 
perceived as any lack of planning or architecture of the environment.  

 

3 

 

NORTH AMERICAN FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTION CASE STUDY 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

“Without a doubt, I’ve never 

been part of an 

implementation for 
something of this 

magnitude that happened 
so efficiently, especially 

under the time constraints.” 
SAN Manager 
Customer IT 

 

25 Metro Drive,  Suite 400 
 San Jose CA 95110  
Sales Information  
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Support Information 
support@virtualinstruments.com  
www.virtualinstruments.com 
 
©2011 Virtual Instruments. All rights 
reserved. Features and specifications 
are subject to change without notice. 
VirtualWisdom®, Virtual Instruments 
are trademarks or registered 
trademarks in the United States 
and/or in other countries. All other 
brands, products, or service names 
are or may be trademarks or service 
marks of, and are used to identify, 
products or services of their 
respective owners.   3/11 

 

