MOBILE TELECOM

  CLIENT

Brightstar, wireless solutions 
and services company

  CHALLENGE

Needed to upgrade its IT 
infrastructure to help sustain 
extraordinary growth and 
meet demanding SLAs 

  SOLUTION

Vblock™ systems that 
reduce data center costs 
and complexity, and speed 
time to market

  RESULTS

Turnaround time for new 
solutions and services has 
been reduced from months 
to days   

www.vce.com

BRIGHTSTAR LOOKS TO VBLOCK 
TO SIMPLIFY ITS DATA CENTER 
ENVIRONMENT AND SUPPORT RAPID 
GROWTH IN WIRELESS 

PRIVATE CLOUD ON DEMAND WINS IN HIGHLY COMPETITIVE SERVICES SPACE 

Brightstar Corporation is the world’s largest specialized wireless distributor and 
a global leader in cloud services and solutions for the wireless industry. The 
company’s offerings range from device insurance, extended warranties, and 
trade-in and buyback of handsets to customized wireless services and solutions 
for value-added distribution, supply-chain optimization, retailers, government 
entities, VARs, and consumers.

The 15-year-old company has experienced skyrocketing growth, with double- and 
even triple-digit annual revenue increases. Recently, Brightstar has continued 
its rapid rise by focusing on expanded service offerings, which often include 
demanding service-level agreements (SLAs). To meet its lofty objectives and 
satisfy customer expectations, Brightstar created its own on-demand private 
cloud capacity using VCE Vblock Systems.

“VCE is the market leader 
in converged infrastructure 
(CI). Every IT organization 
needs to be heading down 
the CI path to provide the 
business greater agility, 
speed, and focus on 
strategic initiatives. That’s 
what VCE has helped 
Brightstar do with our 
Enterprise Private Cloud 
built on Vblock systems.” 
— Glenn Gonzalez, Director 
of Infrastructure Operations 
for Brightstar Corp.

The Challenge 
It was becoming increasingly 
challenging for Brightstar to support 
its hyper-growth curve with an 
inadequate and aging IT infrastructure. 
In its North American data center, 
some assets were underutilized, 
while others were overused—and 
data center space and power were 
at capacity. Acquisitions added 
complexity by creating mixed 
environments with a jumble of 
platforms. Brightstar wasn’t able to 
deploy new services and solutions 
as quickly as desired—impacting 
its ability to keep up with customer 
requirements and meet its SLA 
agreements.

What Brightstar needed was a 
way to improve its time to market, 
minimize IT complexity, and free 
its staff from routine tasks so they 
could handle more critical functions. 
After evaluating leading vendors, 
the company selected VCE Vblock™ 
Systems.

“VCE was the most mature with its 
converged infrastructure,” said Glenn 
Gonzalez, Director of Infrastructure 
Operations for Brightstar. “Having the 
equipment pre-conﬁgured so it only 
needed to be interconnected when 
it arrived in our data center was a 
competitive advantage that enabled 
us to greatly decrease our time to 
market.”

The Solution
In August of 2011, the company 
deployed its ﬁrst Vblock system in a 
new Florida data center to support its 
Latin American operations. The next 
month, Brightstar added  a Vblock 
Series 300 system to its Florida 
installation. In early 2012, the company 
replaced its New Jersey-based 
North American data center with a 
new facility in Virginia—powered by 
another Vblock Series 300 system.

Vblock systems host on-demand, 
cloud-enabled wireless services for 
customers, in addition to supporting 
a range of leading business solutions 
used by Brightstar. In addition, 
the company runs a number of 
customized, web-based solutions 
on Vblock systems, including its 
proprietary Handset Information 
Tracking Systems (HITS™), which 
enable wireless carriers and retailers 
to manage the whole customer 
experience, as well as proﬁt margins 
for our eSecuritel™ insurance program.

The Results
Brightstar has gained signiﬁcant market 
and customer advantages by being 
capable of virtualizing nearly 100% of 
its IT platforms on Vblock systems:

•  Decreased time to build IT environments 
to respond to internal business requests 
or deliver new customer services from 
30–90 days to 3–5 days

•  Reduced server provisioning expenses 

by more than 50%

•  Have won substantial new business 
due to the company’s signiﬁcantly 
enhanced responsiveness and excellent 
performance on SLAs

•  One ﬁnancial report that printed in 20 
minutes on the old infrastructure now 
requires only two minutes to run

•  Attractive aesthetics of the Vblock 

system cabinets impress customers who 
tour Brightstar’s data centers

As the company continues to grow, 
Vblock systems are expected to 
remain central to its plans. Brightstar 
has already completed a number of 
enhancements of its Vblock systems 
to better meet its dynamic business 
requirements.

“We’re calling the process of 
upgrading our IT environment 
‘Infrastructure 2.0’,” Gonzalez stated. 
“Right now, Vblock systems are clearly 
the underlying foundation of our 
Infrastructure 2.0 process.”

 
Copyright © 2012 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, LLC. and/or its  
afﬁliates in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

www.vce.com

THE WORLD’S MOST ADVANCED CONVERGED INFRASTRUCTURE

