VBLOCK IS CORNERSTONE OF  

NEW IN-HOUSE IT OPERATION FOR 

CANAdIAN PACIFIC 

Rail	CaRRieR	RollS	out	ViRtualiZeD	S aP	Solution	in	ReC oRD	tiMe

2012 was a year of dramatic change for Canadian Pacific (CP). Economic and market 
challenges caused CP to make fundamental shifts to drive continuous improvement 
and create opportunity. The railroad wanted to more effectively manage costs, 
streamline processes, and be more responsive to its customers to grow its share of 
profitable intermodal traffic and other business.

As part of this sweeping transformation, CP took a fresh look at its outsourced IT and 
decided to bring the entire operation in-house. After evaluating various options, CP 
chose Vblock™ Systems from VCE to virtualize its extensive suite of business-critical 
SAP applications and other business solutions.

“We were looking for significant operational and cost efficiencies,” said Mike Redeker, 
Vice President and CIO of CP. “I’m pleased to say we’ve realized both.”

tRanSPoRtation

	 Client

Canadian Pacific

	 Challenge

Move from inefficient, 
outsourced mainframe IT 
services to an in-house, private 
cloud implementation

	 Solution

Vblock Systems running a 
broad suite of SAP enterprise 
applications and other 
business-critical solutions

	 ReSultS

Has dramatically improved 
system-wide operations and 
customer responsiveness  
while reducing IT costs

www.vce.com

“For	us,	Vblock	Systems	are		
an	ideal	solution. We have  
one infrastructure from one 
business partner on one 
platform. It’s made it very easy.”

— Mike Redeker 
Vice President and CIO 
Canadian Pacific

the	Challenge	
Headquartered in Calgary, Canadian 
Pacific is a transcontinental railway 
operating in Canada and the U.S., with 
direct links to eight major ports. For 
many years, the railroad outsourced its IT 
services to large mainframe providers.

CP will port the remainder of its critical 
railway applications to the virtualized 
environment in 2013. The company also 
relies on Vblock Systems for disaster 
recovery, with a new data center in 
Minneapolis fully mirroring the one at  
its Calgary headquarters.

Faced with growing competitive 
challenges, the railroad knew it needed 
to be faster, more agile, and quicker to 
respond to customer requirements. It also 
wanted to be able to decrease expenses—
and do more with less to achieve 
profitable growth.

the	Solution
With a true “green field” opportunity, CP 
thoroughly analyzed IT solutions from 
a number of providers and selected 
the advanced converged infrastructure 
of Vblock Systems for its in-house, 
private cloud implementation. The 
entire process—from procurement to full 
production—was handled between July 
and November of 2012.

Most impressive was how smoothly the 
actual conversion went. CP has one 
of the largest SAP footprints in the 
transportation industry. The railroad runs 
its inventory scheduling and tracking 
solution on SAP, as well as financial 
applications and customer relationship 
management (CRM)—its complete back 
office. Redeker and his IT team worked 
closely with VCE Professional Services 
and specialists from SAP to deploy 
the infrastructure and implement the 
application environment.

“We were able to convert everything—
our integrated Sybase database, SAP 
applications, the entire operation—
in one weekend,” Redeker recalls. 
“Quite honestly, it’s been a flawless 
implementation to-date.”

the	Results
As Canadian Pacific focuses on delivering 
higher quality, more responsive service, 
managing costs more effectively, and 
maximizing its use of assets, the converged 
infrastructure of Vblock Systems is 
contributing in a variety of ways:

•  CP is already seeing a 30% improvement 

in productivity as well as taking fewer 
calls from customers at its help desk.

•  The smaller IT footprint of the virtualized 
landscape is also delivering performance 
improvements and the anticipated total 
cost of ownership savings.

•  Vblock Systems are providing the 

reliability a 24x7 railroad requires, with 
Redeker remarking that he and his 
staff “don’t really have to worry about 
whether the IT infrastructure is up or 
down, because it hasn’t been down 
since we deployed it.”

•  With CP’s mirrored data centers, if an 
incident occurs at one data center, the 
company will be able to quickly bring 
up the other.

•  The flexibility and simplified provisioning 

capabilities of Vblock Systems will 
enable CP to easily grow and mature its 
SAP-Sybase environment to keep pace 
with customer needs.

•  CP has built a true collaborative 

partnership with VCE as well as the 
specialists at SAP.

Of the VCE team, Redeker noted, 
“Our relationship with VCE has been 
outstanding— they have great skills, are 
really articulate professionals, and they 
the have ability to push at the right times 
and in the right places.”

Copyright © 2013 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. VCE, VCE Vision and Vblock are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company LLC or its  
affiliates in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

www.vce.com

the	WoRlD’S	Mo St	aDVanCeD	ConVeRgeD	inFRa StRuCtuRe

