TRANSPORTATION

	 CLIENT

Canadian Pacific, a 
transcontinental railway  
in Canada and the  
United States

	 CHALLENGE

Transition outsourced IT 
operations in-house to reduce 
costs and speed delivery  
of IT services

	 SOLUTION

VCE Vblock Systems with 
VCE Deployment and 
Implementation Service and 
VCE Cloud Managed Services

	 RESULTS

Reduced provisioning of 
critical SAP environments  
from months to weeks;  
saved millions in  
outsourcing fees

vce.com

CANADIAN PACIFIC ALL ABOARD FOR IT 

TRANSFORMATION JOURNEY WITH VCE 

PROFESSIONAL SERVICES 

TRANSCONTINENTAL	RAILWAY	MOVES	FROM	OUTSOURCING	TO	INSOURCING 	
MODEL,	IMPROVING	IT	AGILITY	AND	SAVING	$130	MILLION	OVER	THREE	YEARS

Canadian Pacific (CP) provides a suite of freight rail transportation services, offering 
direct links to four major ports with access to key global markets. As CP’s infrastructure 
grew to support expanded business operations, issues with IT’s outsourced model 
began to emerge. Provisioning new SAP environments took months, slowing IT’s 
responsiveness to business demands. Outsourcing costs also were rising, limiting IT’s 
ability to invest in advanced applications to enhance the business.

With the help of VCE™ Professional Services, CP is migrating all of its 500 applications, 
including SAP, to Vblock® Systems, and transformed outsourced IT operations to an 
insourcing model. CP’s IT organization now provisions SAP environments in weeks 
versus months, and saved $30 million in outsourcing fees the first year alone. 

The	Challenge
Mandated by the CEO to increase control over infrastructure assets and dramatically 
reduce costs, IT needed to move outsourced operations in-house and migrate  
all of its applications to its Vblock Systems within two years.

CP initially worked with several independent contractors, but they lacked  
extensive experience with Vblock Systems technologies, raising concerns  
that the transformation would not be successful. Since CP’s in-house  
IT team also had limited knowledge of Vblock Systems, the company  
engaged VCE Professional Services to manage the transformation.

“VCE	Professional	Services	
really	cares	about	our	success 
and they know how critical 
the Vblock Systems are to our 
business. They’re quick and 
nimble enough to provide the 
right resources when we need 
them so we can get the most 
value from of our infrastructure 
investments.”

— Mike Redeker, Vice President 
and CIO, Canadian Pacific

The	Solution
CP has standardized on VCE Vblock 
Systems comprised of EMC, Cisco, and 
VMware technologies. The company 
replaced outsourced mainframes with six 
Vblock Systems deployed across two data 
centers approximately 1,200 miles apart, 
with full replication for disaster recovery.

VCE Professional Services, including VCE™ 
Deployment and Implementation Service 
and VCE™ Cloud Managed Services, worked 
with CP to deploy the Vblock Systems 
while making sure that SAP and other 
critical applications continued to run—
especially important since the loss of any 
one application could halt train operations. 

In the next project phase, the VCE team 
managed the Vblock Systems for ten 
months, helping to reduce operational 
risk and costs while CP completed 
construction of its new data centers. 
VCE Professional Services provided 
expert, ITIL-based 24X7 administration 
and monitoring of CP’s Vblock Systems, 
including incident, problem, change, and 
release management based on service-
level agreements. 

Then, VCE Professional Services provided 
knowledge transfer and training so CP’s 
IT team would be self-sufficient managing 
and supporting the infrastructure. 

The 95-percent virtualized converged 
infrastructure runs CP’s hundreds of 
applications, including SAP enterprise 
resource planning, SAP customer 
relationship management, and SAP 
financial accounting, as well as 
Microsoft Exchange and custom railroad 
applications for managing inventory,  
car repair, and logistics.

The	Results
By collaborating with VCE Professional 
Services, CP accelerated its IT 
transformation, completing the 

migration from an outsourced mainframe 
infrastructure to an internally managed 
infrastructure within their two year 
schedule. This has provided CP with a 
number of benefits, including:

•  Helped IT become more nimble  

and responsive to business demands  
and gain the ability to provision new  
SAP environments in weeks rather  
than months.

•  Enhanced in-house IT skills and 
competency in Vblock Systems 
technologies through knowledge 
transfer, job shadowing, formal training, 
and sharing of best practices.

•  Reduced infrastructure administration 

resources and support from 12 
contractors to three staff FTEs.

•  Saved $30 million in outsourcing fees 
the first year with an additional $100 
million in savings in the following two 
years, freeing up funds for strategic 
capital projects aimed at increasing  
CP’s competiveness.

•  The positive financial gains that CP’s 
IT group has realized over the past 18 
months, has helped contribute to a 
positive impact on the organizations 
Operating Ratio, a key measurement 
utilized within the railway industry.

•  Increased application response time 

by 30 percent, helping business users 
become more productive and efficient.

Canadian Pacific now has a vastly more 
efficient infrastructure supported by a self-
sufficient IT staff capable of maintaining 
tighter control and more cost-effective 
management of critical IT assets. 

With VCE, CP has combined the best 
of both worlds—in-house technical 
competency to support everyday business 
needs, plus access to expert advice to 
guide infrastructure enhancements as  
the company’s needs evolve.

Copyright © 2013, 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. VCE, VCE Vision and Vblock are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company LLC  
or its affiliates in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

vce.com

THE	WORLD’S	MOST	ADVANCED	CONVERGED	INFRASTRUCTURE

10202014

