U.S. HEALTHCARE INSURER  
CASE STUDY 

 

       

  

Challenges:  
•  Pressure on IT staff to 

manage hyper growth in 
online data storage 

•  Day to day problem 

identification and resolution 
was consuming IT staff time. 

Solution:  
•  Virtual Instruments 
VirtualWisdom SAN 
Availability Probe, SAN 
Performance Probe, and 
SANInsight TAPs. 
VirtualWisdom SAN Health 
Audit service 

Customer Benefits:  
•  With VirtualWisdom, causes 
of potential application slow-
downs can be identified and 
corrective action taken before 
users are even aware of a 
problem 

•  Productivity of existing staff 
is maximized, to ensure that 
issues are quickly identified 
and remediated without 
wasted time 

“We love the Tivo for the SAN 
capabilities of VirtualWisdom.”  
Insurer 
Storage Architect 

 

 

 

 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

 

Leading US regional healthcare insurer deploys 
VirtualWisdom to monitor its SAN to help 
manage hyper-growth 
Overview  

This not-for-profit, non-stock health services company offers products and services to 
individuals and groups in the U.S., serving over three million members. 

IT Environment  

With over 3 PB of online disk capacity today, this insurer’s data storage growth is 
expected to top 13 PB by 2014.  Primary storage vendors are EMC Symmetrix for Tier 0 
and 1, IBM DS8000 for Tier 1, and EMC CLARiiON, IBM DS4000 and NetApp NAS for Tier 
2.  Servers are a mix of Microsoft, VMware, Linux, and UNIX, with less than 20% of the 
data accessed by a mainframe.  The Fibre Channel fabric is Brocade-based with SANs 
running at 2, 4, and 8Gbps across more than 3500 ports. Major applications supported 
include Exchange, Oracle Financials, PeopleSoft, BI, Facets (and integrated health care 
administration application), and SODS ( a data collection system). 

Challenges 

With the expected increase in data storage, managing growth is clearly the number one 
challenge for the IT team.  Even basic questions like “what do we have?” and “how is it 
working?” become time-consuming to answer.  And as the amount of data has increased, 
it became very evident that faster problem resolution wasn’t enough; that more had to be 
done to anticipate and prevent small problems from becoming serious and threatening 
application availability. 

Role of VirtualWisdom – a proactive approach 

In late 2011, Virtual Instruments prepared a VirtualWisdom SAN Health Audit.  By looking 
deep into the SAN infrastructure physical layers, the VI team quickly identified 
performance and behavior anomalies plus potential trouble spots. A comprehensive report 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

U.S. HEALTHCARE INSURER  
CASE STUDY 

 

       

  

of analysis and findings was provided and on balance, the SAN was deemed to be fairly 
healthy.  But a few items stood out that required immediate attention: 

•  VirtualWisdom found several physical layer issues such as bad cables, and 

degrading SFPs that if left un-remediated, could have led to application 
slowdowns or outages 

•  Some hosts only had one SAN connection, and this lack of redundancy could 

have caused an application outage if the only path had failed 

•  Some hosts had two SAN connections but only showed traffic on one connection 
(unbalanced paths), even though the multi-pathing configuration appeared to be 
set up correctly  

The IT team reported that VirtualWisdom offered a level of visibility into the SAN fabric 
they had never seen before, giving them a real-time and historical window into all 
transactions from the host to the LUN.  

To ensure that the staff had a way to measure current and future SAN health, it embraced 
the Virtual Instruments SAN Maturity Model (SMM). The SMM framework gives enterprises 
a template of Maturity Levels, Key Process Areas (KPAs), Goals (KPIs), and best practices 
that help quantify the direct benefits of SAN optimization. By fully adopting the 
recommendations in the SAN Maturity Model, as well as implementing the technology 
solution to monitor and manage the SAN, this insurer is well down the path of lower cost 
and lower risk, even in the face of hyper-growth. 

Going forward, this customer will expand the use of VirtualWisdom from just on Tier 1 
storage to broad deployment on their Tier 2 storage systems.  They also plan to add the 
VirtualWisdom Virtual Server Probe to be able to better identify and resolve VMware I/O 
performance problems. 

Summary 

When asked what he would recommend to new VirtualWisdom customers, the Storage 
Architect remarked that he was very pleased with the increased visibility of the I/O offered 
by the VirtualWisdom solution, augmented by the expertise of the Virtual Instruments 
Professional Services staff. 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

“The VI SAN Maturity Model 
enables us match our storage 
infrastructure to our business 

needs.”  

Insurer 
Storage Architect  

 

 
25 Metro Drive, Suite 400  
San Jose, CA 95110  
 
Sales Information  
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
 
Customer Support  
support@virtualinstruments.com  
www.virtualinstruments.com 
 
 
©2012 Virtual Instruments. All rights 
reserved. Features and specifications are 
subject to change without notice 02/12 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

