Case study 
Wm Morrisons supermarket

Reducing the Risks of storage Migration

Wm Morrison Supermarkets Uses 
VirtualWisdom® to Guarantee Oracle Application 
Performance Through Major Storage Migration

Company Background
This UK-based major supermarket chain has been in business for over 100 
years, changing and adapting to meet its customers’ needs. Today the 
company takes a vertically integrated approach to its business, achieving 
supply chain efficiencies by owning many of the factories that provision 
its supermarket shelves. The company also grows through acquisition. 
To support its rapidly changing and evolving business, the company is 
transforming its IT environment, implementing integrated supply chain 
solutions and optimizing IT efficiency.
IT Environment
The supermarket chain runs many of its strategic applications on Oracle 
Retail and E-Business Suite platforms, with a HP and Brocade storage 
environment. To meet its expanding application and data needs, the IT 
team upgraded the storage infrastructure, migrating from monolithic and 
modular arrays to HP 3PAR StoreServ arrays. In addition, they upgraded 
the SAN with a new fibre optic structured cabling system (from VI 
Partner Splice Group), standardizing on 8Gbps end-to-end Fibre Channel 
connectivity. Data Replication and stretched SANs across data centre 
locations was achieved using new point-to-point dark-fibre circuits with 
40GE IP and 320Gbps FC initial bandwidth. 

Challenges

•  Storage migration to new 

storage network and arrays
•  More than 600 applications 
to migrate, including critical 
Oracle PeopleSoft and 
E-Business Suite systems 
managing vertically-integrated 
supply chain and 130,000+ 
employees

•  Need to guarantee application 

performance before, during 
and after major migration

Solution

•  Virtual Instruments 

VirtualWisdom® platform 
and services, including the 
SAN Performance and SAN 
Availability Probes

VirtualWisdom allows you to 
dig in and understand why 
applications are behaving as 
they are, and where potential 
problems lie…we can make 
strategic investments based on 
sound performance information.

Simon Close 
Head of Storage, Wm morriSon 
SupermarketS pLC

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Customer Benefits

•  Identification of major 

performance issues during 
early testing, before migration

•  Reduced risks of major 
infrastructure changes 
through real-time insight into 
performance implications of 
change 

•  Reduced CAPEX through 

cost avoidance, with 
provisioning based on detailed 
performance needs

•  Ability to demonstrate 

performance gains on an 
application-by-application 
basis to internal stakeholders
•  Storage network optimization 

through end-to-end insight 
into performance

VirtualWisdom uncovered 
several issues in testing, 
and gave us the detailed 
information we needed to 
resolve those problems with 
the vendor rather than wasting 
time and deflecting blame…
… getting to the route 
cause quickly is critical, 
VirtualWisdom enables that.

Pervinder Bhamra 
enterpriSe Storage SpeCiaLiSt, 
Wm morriSon SupermarketS pLC

Business Challenge
This retailer achieves competitive advantage through supply chain 
efficiencies. Part of its strategy is to integrate across the supply chain; 
owning farms, manufacturing and distribution centers which supply its 
retail supermarkets and convenience stores. The supply chain is the heart 
of this business, and the Oracle software that runs it is truly business 
critical. As the company grows, it aims to both optimize supply chain 
efficiency and to protect it from failures or outages that could cause 
serious damage to the business. This means achieving a careful balance 
of business continuity and operational efficiency. 
 
IT Challenge
The Oracle applications are vital to business operations, so protecting 
application performance is critical. The company decided to upgrade its 
storage network and storage hardware, with replication to another data 
center for business continuity. Before migrating vital applications to the 
new storage, the IT team had to convince internal stakeholders that the 
new environment would deliver the equivalent or better performance 
than the old one. With more than 600 applications to migrate, this was a 
significant challenge. During the migration, the team had to identify and 
proactively fix a number of performance and configuration issues before 
they affected production systems.

the Virtual Instruments solution 
Morrisons looked to Virtual Instruments to provide an agnostic 
insurance policy which would underpin their Storage Transformation. 
By instrumenting the storage infrastructure, they would be able to 
monitor data traffic passing through it to provide very detailed diagnostic 
information about application response times and fibre channel protocol 
errors. The IT team made extensive use of the end-to-end insight available 
through VirtualWisdom to baseline performance prior to the migration 
and also to baseline performance post migration to demonstrate the 
effectiveness of their storage investment.

HP – UX Servers

ODF A

ODF B

Brocade SAN Switch

VirtualWisdom Server

SAN Performance Probe

SAN Performance Probe

OM3/OS1ﬁbre
1GE

HP 3PAR V400

VirtualWisdom Deployment

Finding problems early: During initial pre-deployment testing, VirtualWisdom uncovered several performance and 
configuration issues with the new storage implementation. With the detailed insight delivered from VirtualWisdom, 
the team could pinpoint the problems and work with the vendors to address them, before moving forward with the 
larger storage migration. With its vendor-neutral, end-to-end insight, VirtualWisdom eliminated the finger-pointing 
that could otherwise delay rapid root cause analysis and problem resolution, helping minimize deployment delays. 
 
Performance Verification: The IT team created VirtualWisdom performance dashboards for a number of their 
business critical applications. These enabled the easy creation of performance benchmarks which were used to 
establish baselines of pre and post migration metrics. Using the dashboards and baselines the IT team were able 
to identify any performance or configuration issues before cutover and more critically before they became service 
impacting. Overall, the Virtual Instruments toolsets were used to provide objective evidence that the new storage 
infrastructure was meeting or exceeding its performance objectives and non-functional requirements.
 
Ready for the next migration: VirtualWisdom reduces the risks of major migrations and helps them ensure the 
smooth operation of business critical applications. Additionally, the retailer can now plan for additional growth 
and capacity based on detailed performance information, rather than raw volume numbers. According to the 
company’s head of storage,Simon Close “There’s a strong temptation to simply throw hardware at a performance 
issue, but often that just moves the bottleneck rather than solving the problem. With Virtual Instruments, we can 
make accurate and strategic investments based on sound performance information.”
 
Customer Benefits
Specific VirtualWisdom benefits to the IT team include:
•  Rapid identification of several significant performance issues during testing, 

so problems were corrected before the production migration

•  Reduced risks of storage migration by closely monitoring performance in real time
•  Reduced CAPEX by cost avoidance: capacity planning guided by 

performance requirements, not guesses based on volumes

•  Successful migration of business critical Oracle Applications and 

hundreds of other applications to new storage environment

•  Performance optimization of new storage environment
•  Constant monitoring of real-time SAN performance during migrations, upgrades, and 

reconfigurations to ensure that changes do not hurt application performance

Corporate Headquarters
25 Metro Drive, 
San Jose, CA 95110 · USA
Phone: 408-579-4000
Fax: 408-579-4001

European Headquarters
46 New Broad Street
London EC2M 1JH
Phone: +44 (0) 203-651-5685

Asia Pacific Headquarters
8 Cross Street Level 28
PWC Building, Singapore 048424
Phone: +65 6850-7841

Sales
sales@virtualinstruments.com
Phone: 888-522-2557
Support
support@virtualinstruments.com

©2013  Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or 
may be trademarks or servicemarks of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 10/13

