CASE STUDY 
ByteLife

Guaranteeing Performance and Availability of Critical 
Applications in an EMC® VPLEX™ Environment

ByteLife Uses VirtualWisdom® to Complement 
EMC VPLEX in Two Data Centers for Real-Time 
End-to-End Infrastructure Performance Monitoring 

Company Background
ByteLife is a data infrastructure company that builds, manages and guarantees 
critical business information systems. Its clients are companies whose latency 
sensitive transactions must be guaranteed against performance degradation or 
loss, which means that their data centers need to be 100% available. ByteLife’s 
main competencies are built around data centers: automation, management, 
virtualization, storage, networking, backup and archiving. Its primary technology 
partners are EMC, Cisco, VMware, VCE and Virtual Instruments. ByteLife 
customers are leading banks and telecommunication companies in the Nordic 
region and Baltic states such as Swedbank, Danske Bank, SEB, First Data, ABLV 
Bank, and the TeliaSonera AB companies EMT, Elion, Omnitel, TEO, and LMT. 
Founded in 2005, ByteLife has offices in the three Baltic states and Sweden. The 
company’s 2012 revenue was more than 10 million euros.

Customer Challenge
ByteLife recognizes that as the demands and complexities placed on data 
centers by mission-critical applications continue to increase, so does the 
need to guarantee their performance and availability. To show customers how 
to optimize performance and availability in a real-world setting, Tarmo 

Challenges

•  Need to guarantee 

performance and availability of 
mission-critical applications

•  Lack of visibility to assess 

the entire infrastructure and 
get the data needed to make 
intelligent decisions about 
performance at every layer of 
the infrastructure

•  Other vendor tools 

cannot monitor the entire 
infrastructure

•  Eliminate risk to infrastructure 

associated with the 
introduction of storage 
virtualization (VPLEX)

Solution

•  VirtualWisdom platform with 
SANInsight TAP Patch Panels, 
SAN Availability ProbeSW, SAN 
Performance Probe and Virtual 
Server Probe VM

I strongly recommend that 
customers use VirtualWisdom 
Performance Probes to 
monitor VPLEX environments. 
VirtualWisdom adds visibility 
into the application layer and 
quantifies any perceived 
VPLEX performance 
impacts in real-time.

Tarmo Katmuk
SOLUTIONS ARCHITECT, BYTELIFE
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Customer Benefits

•   Sub-second latency metrics 
allow for proactive detection 
of problems that can disrupt 
application performance and 
availability

•   End-to-end view of the EMC 
VPLEX environment and real-
time root cause identification 
•   Ability to proactively identify 

slow application response 
times and improve cycle times 
and the customer experience

•   Application performance 

issues readily identified and 
remediated

•   Ability to de-risk data center 
migration while accelerating 
adoption of storage 
virtualization (VPLEX)

Our plan is to include Virtual 
Instruments Traffic Access 
Points (TAPs) to every major 
storage project – VPLEX, 
VMAX, or whatever storage 
we are selling – to proactively 
monitor the environment.

Tarmo Katmuk
SOLUTIONS ARCHITECT, BYTELIFE

Katmuk, ByteLife solutions architect, set out to create a small-scale version 
of an actual data center with two separate, but connected, data centers 
running applications independently. 

IT Environment
The storage environment in the two ByteLife data centers includes EMC® 
VNX5300™ unified storage arrays with approximately 20 terabytes capacity. EMC® 
Fully Automated Storage Tiering for Virtual Pools (FAST VP) enables ByteLife to 
automate tiering among various drive types from SATA to Fibre Channel to Flash 
Drives. Fast Cache is used to speed up I/O response times within the storage 
array. EMC VPLEX virtual storage technology is installed in both data centers 
and provides application mobility and collaboration, ensuring availability during 
planned and unplanned downtime scenarios. The host environment is FCoE 
connected to Cisco Nexus 5000, and VPLEX is a full Fibre Channel front end and 
back end solution. VPLEX is connected to MDS switches in both data centers 
with the VPLEX connection going through Cisco 10 gigabit Ethernet switches 
(there is a 10 gigabit link between VPLEXs). The data centers feature Cisco® UCS 
B-Series blade servers, and the hypervisor used is VMware ESX 5.1, which is more 
than enough for ByteLife’s test environment. The Oracle RAC environment - a 
complicated real application cluster environment - has been tested extensively.

IT Challenge
The most significant challenge in deploying mission-critical, latency sensitive 
applications is guaranteeing the performance and availability of the 
underlying infrastructure when new components like storage virtualization 
are introduced. The need for end-to-end performance visibility requires a 
holistic approach that continuously measures and monitors variations in 
latency at a sub-second level. It was tricky for Tarmo to measure latency 
because each component in the data center chain had its own native 
monitoring or configuration tool, but there was no end-to-end view of the 
overall infrastructure. He attempted to resolve this by measuring latency, 
response time and I/O with and without VPLEX in the configuration and then 
comparing the delta.

The Virtual Instruments Solution 
ByteLife established a partnership with Nicolas Kollerstedt, Virtual 
Instruments Regional Sales Manager, in 2012 when VirtualWisdom® was 
added to its data centers to make them 100% available. The VirtualWisdom 
platform drives improved performance and availability against infrastructures 
supporting mission-critical applications, provides unbiased, real-time 
performance health and utilization metrics, and delivers end-to-end visibility. 
While ByteLife has a long-term partnership with EMC, Tarmo concluded 
that none of the EMC tools could monitor the holistic environment - from 
the storage layer up to the application layer and everything in between. 
He concluded that Virtual Instruments offers the only real-time monitoring 
solution that is simple to use while giving him an end-to-end view of the 
environment. Tarmo finds the time stamp functionality especially useful as 
it allows him to slide back and forth to get a historical picture of exactly 
what was happening in the infrastructure at a specific time. Moreover, 
VirtualWisdom does not introduce additional complexity or latency into the 
environment. “If you go for an EMC VPLEX solution,” notes Tarmo, “I strongly 
suggest you have Virtual Instruments Traffic Access Points (TAPs) installed 
in front of VPLEX so customers can proactively monitor the environment 

and identify in real-time any issues that could cause latency.” For example, if the VPLEX system is overloaded, Tarmo 
can decide whether to add more capacity to the data center or move applications from one data center to another. 
He emphasizes that Virtual Instruments gives customers peace of mind through preventative maintenance and 
prescriptive guidance when they virtualize their storage using EMC VPLEX. More important, VirtualWisdom end-to-end 
performance metrics enabled ByteLife to accelerate their VPLEX deployment, eliminate performance blind spots, and 
more accurately predict infrastructure needs. Tarmo and Nicolas plan to include TAPs in every major project they’re 
collaborating on that includes storage – VPLEX, VMAX, or whatever brand of storage they are working with. 

Virtual Server ProbeVM

Servers & VMs

SAN Availability ProbeSW

FC Switch Fabric

SANInsignt® TAP Patch Panel

VPLEX

VirtualWisdom Server

SAN Performance ProbeFC8-HD48

SAN Performance ProbeFC8-HD

AND/OR

SAN Performance ProbeFC8

Storage Arrays

Comprehensive VirtualWisdom software and hardware deployment in an EMC VPLEX environment

Corporate Headquarters
25 Metro Drive, 
San Jose, CA 95110 · USA
Phone: 408-579-4000
Fax: 408-579-4001

European Headquarters
46 New Broad Street
London EC2M 1JH
Phone: +44 (0) 203-651-5685

Asia Pacific Headquarters
8 Cross Street Level 28
PWC Building, Singapore 048424
Phone: +65 6850-7841

Sales
sales@virtualinstruments.com
Phone: 888-522-2557
Support
support@virtualinstruments.com

©2013  Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or 
may be trademarks or servicemarks of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 10/13

