CHILTON HOSPITAL ACCELERATES 
INNOVATION WITH VBLOCK 

AWARD-WINNING HOSPITAL TRANSFORMS HEALTHCARE IT

Chilton Hospital has been transforming the way it delivers medical care to 
communities in northwestern New Jersey. The 260 bed hospital has expanded 
clinical care services and adopted advanced medical care technologies to enable 
excellence in the quality of care. Additionally, Chilton has launched the Chilton 
Health Network, offering community-based services throughout the region. 

All of this has increased the pressure on the data center. Chilton was facing dozens 
of new projects to expand its MEDITECH environment and meet meaningful use 
requirements for electronic healthcare record (EHR) projects. However, silos of 
legacy systems were hampering agility, and space constraints were threatening to 
impact patient care. To keep pace with the business, Chilton had to either build out 
a new data center or consolidate its existing infrastructure.

Chilton chose VblockTM Systems for its data center consolidation project. The 
decision accelerated the rollout of MEDITECH applications, improved application 
performance, and increased overall IT efficiency.

HEALTHCARE

  CLIENT

Chilton Hospital, an award-
winning acute care hospital 
with 1,400 employees serving 
Northwestern New Jersey

  CHALLENGE

Speed the delivery of critical 
IT projects, streamline 
administration and increase 
infrastructure reliability

  SOLUTION 

Vblock™ System 300 

  RESULTS

Rolled out dozens of new 
IT projects that increased 
hospital efficiency and 
improved quality of patient 
care while creating an agile 
infrastructure for continued 
innovation and growth

www.vce.com

“The magnitude and speed 
of change and innovation 
for the hospital has been 
remarkable. VCE was pivotal 
in enabling such a dramatic 
transformation.”

“VCE Support has been 
excellent. They have great 
knowledge of MEDITECH 
and all of the Vblock System 
technologies, which has been 
a huge benefit in helping 
us resolve issues quickly 
and enabling accelerated 
healthcare delivery.”

— Meraz Nasir,  

director of  technology 
services, Chilton Hospital 

The Challenge
Chilton had been running its applications 
on a mix of dedicated IBM and HP servers, 
none of which were virtualized systems. 
Although server and storage utilization was 
low, new deployments required additional 
hardware, expanding the data center foot-
print and increasing complexity. 

As a result, Chilton IT was primarily a sup-
port-focused organization consumed with 
troubleshooting issues. When issues arose, 
vendors often engaged in finger pointing, 
extending time to resolution and wasting 
Chilton’s limited IT resources.

Even when IT carved out time for strate-
gic projects, it would take weeks or even 
months to deliver needed server and  
storage technologies. The backlog of 
requests was growing while projects in 
progress were often delayed.

The Solution
Chilton evaluated solutions from HP, 
EMC and VCE. Ultimately, the healthcare 
provider replaced its HP and IBM systems 
with a single VCE VblockTM System 300 
comprised of Cisco Unified Computing 
System (UCS) blade servers and EMC VNX® 
unified storage. Approximately 93 percent 
of the server infrastructure is virtualized 
with VMware® vSphere™ 5 and physicians’ 
remote access desktops are virtualized 
with VMware View 5.

The Vblock System now provides Chilton 
with the agility, efficiency and easy 
manageability it needs to move forward on 
dozens of critical projects. All of Chilton’s 
clinical and business applications—
including MEDITECH EHR, Quantum 
medical coding, Cardiac Science Pyramis 
ECG management, Varian oncology 
systems, and Alpha ImageWorks EMR 
(electronic medical record), as well as 
Microsoft Exchange, SQL Server Cluster, 
Microsoft Lync 2013 and SharePoint—run 
on the Vblock System.

To protect its applications, Chilton 
deployed EMC backup and recovery 
solutions, including EMC Data Domain® 
deduplication storage systems with 
EMC Data Domain Boost software, EMC 
NetWorker® unified backup and recovery 
software, EMC NetWorker Module for 
MEDITECH backup and recovery software 
(NMMEDI), and EMC RecoverPoint™ remote 
data protection. The Data Domain system 
is replicated to another system at  
a secondary site for added protection.

EMC partner CDI designed, installed,  
and configured the Vblock System.  
Post-implementation support is provided 
by VCE.

The Results
With the agility enabled by virtualization 
and IT as a Service (ITaaS), Chilton Hospital 
has rolled out 60 new applications in one 
year, including new MEDITECH applications 
such as computerized physician order 
entry (CPOE), medication administration 
and reconciliation, as well as new business 
applications. IT estimates it takes half a 
day to deploy and configure new servers, 
compared to the weeks or months 
previously required.

With the Vblock System, IT has significantly 
improved efficiency, performance and 
availability of critical applications:

•	 Evolved	from	zero	to	93	percent	

virtualized in nine months

•	 Reduced	the	number	of	data	center	

racks from 22 to 10, avoiding $4 million 
in construction costs to build a new data 
center while creating more space for 
innovation and growth

•	 Increased	storage	utilization	from	6	to	 

93 percent

•	 Improved	system	performance	by	two	to	
three times, shrinking the time to deliver 
lab blood results to doctors from ten 
minutes to one or two minutes

•	 Improved	recovery	time	objective	(RTO)	

from 24 hours to 30 minutes

•	 Achieved	daily	full	backups	with	

MEDITECH backups completing in a few 
hours compared to two days

Thanks to the Vblock System, Chilton’s  
IT staff has more time for projects that help 
the hospital continually improve patient 
care. In fact, the role of IT is evolving 
to become much more of a service 
provider. With a more efficient, reliable 
and streamlined infrastructure, IT is more 
focused on developing innovative solutions 
that align with Chilton’s strategic plan.

Copyright © 2013 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. VCE, VCE Vision, Vblock, and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company LLC 
or its affiliates in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

www.vce.com

THE WORLD’S MOST ADVANCED CONVERGED INFRASTRUCTURE

