GOVERNMENT

	 CLIENT

The City of Denton, the 
eleventh largest city of the 
Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex

	 CHALLENGE

Meet increased demand for 
government services in a 
fast-growing community

	 SOLUTION

VCE Vblock System

	 RESULTS

Deployed disaster recovery 
infrastructure in six weeks; 
delivered 300-plus percent 
performance improvement 
for critical applications

vce.com

CITY OF DENTON BOOSTS APPLICATION 

PERFORMANCE WITH VBLOCK SYSTEM 

FAST-GROWING	TEXAS	CITY	ACCELERATES	DISASTER	RECOVERY 	
DEPLOYMENT;	SCALES	INFRASTRUCTURE	TO	SUPPORT	RAPID	EXPANSION 	

The City of Denton employs 1,500 staff and provides services to more than 121,000 
residents across nearly 95 square miles. As one of the fastest-growing communities 
in Texas, Denton determined that its IT infrastructure was no longer delivering 
adequate system performance. 

Disaster recovery also was a concern since the region was at high risk for tornados 
and flooding. If a major outage occurred, it would take days or weeks to recover 
Denton’s data center from its tape backup system. This would disrupt vital 
government services and cost $200,000 in lost revenue daily from city-owned 
utilities and other fees.

Choosing the Vblock™ System, Denton rolled out a disaster recovery infrastructure 
in weeks versus months while significantly increasing the performance of its Esri 
ArcGIS solution and other critical applications.

The	Challenge
To address Denton’s evolving requirements, the IT staff considered numerous 
solutions, including other storage systems and blade servers, but ultimately 
implemented EMC storage, Cisco UCS servers, Cisco networking, and VMware 
virtualization technologies at its primary data center.

“The Vblock	System can 
handle three times the 
performance required by 
our ArcGIS application. That 
headroom is important as 
Denton’s population and 
consumption of services 
grows and puts more demand 
on our IT infrastructure”  
— Kevin Gunn, Director  
of Technology Services,  
City of Denton

Denton wanted the same best-of-breed 
infrastructure at a new disaster recovery 
site but with an accelerated deployment. 
There was a short-term opportunity to 
expand a new severe weather-proof 
electric utilities dispatch center under 
construction with room for a redundant 
data center. With only 400 square feet  
of data center space available and a  
tight construction schedule, IT chose  
a fully integrated, pretested Vblock 
System based on EMC, Cisco, and  
VMware technologies.

The	Solution
Across its primary and remote sites, 
Denton has standardized on VCE  
Vblock Systems and EMC, Cisco,  
and VMware technologies, replacing its 
prior infrastructure of NetApp, IBM,  
and Dell Compellent systems. Presidio,  
a VCE partner, provided the configuration  
and implementation services for the 
Vblock System.

The City also runs EMC VPLEX Metro 
systems at both sites to enable active-
active processing for data mobility and 
continuous availability of applications. 
Both data centers run Denton’s critical 
applications, including “smart” electric 
meter reading, computer-aided 
emergency dispatch, Oracle JD Edwards 
ERP, Harris Northstar billing environment, 
Microsoft Exchange, and Microsoft SQL 
Server databases. In addition, Denton 
depends on Avamar deduplication storage 
systems for data backup and recovery.

One of Denton’s most critical applications 
is ArcGIS from Esri, the world leader in 
geographic information systems (GIS). 
Esri, a VCE reseller and partner,  
has certified the Vblock System for pre-
installation of the Esri ArcGIS solution. 

Denton uses the Vblock System-ArcGIS 
solution to support public safety 
dispatch, land planning and development, 
and maintenance of Denton’s streets, 
utilities, and sewer resources. The ArcGIS 
database retains hundreds of thousands 
of GIS features along with a series of 

12 aerial and land photograph mosaics 
dating back to 1942.

The	Results
The City credits the Vblock System with 
delivering several significant advantages 
and savings, including:

•  Implementation at the disaster recovery 

site was completed in only six weeks—
compared to the six months needed to 
assemble, integrate, and implement the 
EMC, Cisco, and VMware infrastructure 
at the primary site.

•  Improved performance across all 

applications, such as 100,000 IOPS for 
ArcGIS and other tier-one applications 
during testing—a three-time increase 
over typical IOPS levels of 30,000. 

•  Streamlined infrastructure scalability 

even as the ArcGIS database grew  
from 1.5 to 3.1 million data points in the 
last few years.

•  Better availability of ArcGIS and other 

business-critical applications with 
disaster recovery tests reporting a 
recovery time objective of one minute 
and a recovery point objective of zero 
data loss ,

•  Significant time savings for Denton’s 

small IT staff, which reported that 
weekly administration time has 
decreased from 20 hours spread across 
several staff members to two hours.

With improved efficiency and reliability 
enabled by the Vblock System, IT now 
has more time for projects that directly 
benefit Denton citizens. For example, 
Denton has begun to make its ArcGIS 
maps and other data available on its 
website as part of a national Open  
Data initiative.

Denton is confident that the Vblock 
System will provide the performance, 
scalability, and reliability needed for 
this growing repository of data while 
supporting increased demand for 
government services.

Copyright © 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. VCE, VCE Vision, Vblock, and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company LLC. 
or its affiliates in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

vce.com

THE	WORLD’S	MOST	ADVANCED	CONVERGED	INFRASTRUCTURE

