CASE STUDY 

 

“VCE took a completely fresh 

look at data center 

infrastructure, with the result 

that the Vblock system is 

optimized for cloud computing" 

 

Jeremy Whaley 

Director of Information Systems 

and Network Services 

Claremont McKenna College 

 
 

 

COLLEGE BUILDS SECURE 
MULTITENANT CLOUD  
 
Claremont McKenna College Implemented VblockTM Infrastructure  
Platforms in new campus data center. 
 
Executive Summary 
Claremont McKenna College 
Higher Education 
Claremont, California 
1200 Students 
 
Challenge 
  Increase IT efficiency 
  Support computing needs in joint science lab 
  Prepare for disaster recovery 
 
Solution 
  Vblock 0 system  
 
Results 
  Saved IT staff time through automated provisioning 
  Increased security by reducing rogue websites 
  Built foundation for cloud-based disaster recovery program 
 
Challenge 
A highly selective private liberal arts college, Claremont McKenna College (CMC) is 
part of a seven-college community in Southern California known as The Claremont 
Colleges, a system modeled after England's Oxford University. Founded in 1946, CMC 
enrolls approximately 1200 undergraduate students.  
 
The college’s Information Technology Services (ITS) department provides computing 
services for students, faculty, and staff. ”Technology is embedded into research and 
learning, student residential life, business processes, and our outreach to potential 
students,” says Dr. Cynthia Humes, chief technology officer for CMC and an associate 
professor. Some applications reside in the college data center. Others, such as Cisco 
WebEx™ for conferencing and Google App for student email accounts, are hosted in 
public clouds. 
 
When CMC outgrew its old data center facility, ITS prepared to move into a new 
building to be shared with other departments. College leaders viewed the move as an 
opportunity to adopt cloud computing, with the goal of more quickly introducing new 
applications and services, with less staff effort.  
 
 
 

© 2011 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

“The Vblock system is a natural 

stepping stone between 

traditional IT infrastructure and 

future cloud environments, 

when physical resources might 

not reside on campus at all." 
 
Dr. Cynthia Humes 

Chief Technology Officer 

Claremont McKenna College  
 

 

ITS began looking for a private-cloud platform. A major requirement was support for virtual 
desktops in a lab setting. CMC had offered to provide compute services for the Joint Science 
Department, which serves students from CMC, Pitzer College, and Scripps College. Faculty 
scientists need to provide specialized scientific software on student workstations during 
classes or research sessions, then return the resources to the shared pool.  
 
Another requirement was rapid provisioning of infrastructure as a service (IaaS) for 
faculty, staff, and students who host websites. A common problem on today’s college 
campuses is that well-meaning people host websites on their own laptops, not realizing 
the unsecured laptop can allow intruders and infections into the network.  
 
Solution 
After evaluating two preintegrated data center platforms, CMC selected VblockTM 
Infrastructure Platforms from VCE, which includes Cisco, EMC, and VMware. “VCE took a 
completely fresh look at data center infrastructure, with the result that the Vblock system is 
optimized for cloud computing,” says Jeremy Whaley, director of information systems and 
network services. “As our computing needs grow, we can add storage and compute 
capacity in small increments. And we’ll be able to control a practically unlimited number of 
Vblock systems from the same management interface.”  
 
ITS also liked the fact that Vblock Infrastructure Platforms use best-of-class technology 
already widely used in The Claremont Colleges. CMC has standardized on Cisco® 
networking gear. Several colleges in the consortium use EMC storage solutions, so the 
EMC storage in the Vblock system would simplify disaster recovery initiatives. And all 
colleges had standardized on VMware for virtualization. 
 
CMC engaged Nexus IS, an advanced technology partner, for planning, design, and 
implementation services. Nexus IS installed a Vblock 0 system, which consists of the 
Cisco Unified Computing System™ (UCS), VMware software, and EMC Celerra Unified 
Storage. The college will take advantage of VCE Seamless Support for fast technical 
assistance. “Having a single point of contact for any issue, whether related to servers, 
storage, or virtualization, saves staff time and accelerates issue resolution,” says Whaley. 

 
Results 
Rapid Provisioning for Dynamic Campus Needs 
Orchestration capabilities and automated provisioning have made it practical for the 
college to offer IaaS for web hosting, so that fewer faculty members will host websites on 
their own unsecured PCs and laptops. “Faculty members who use IaaS on the Vblock 
system to host websites preserve their academic freedom while reducing security risks to 
the college,” Humes says. 
 
The Vblock 0 system also enabled ITS to provide an easy-to-use virtual desktop 
infrastructure for the Joint Sciences Department by deploying VMware View, a validated 
virtual desktop solution for Vblock Infrastructure Platforms.  What’s more, ITS can reserve 
network bandwidth for different college user groups, so that one group’s usage does not 
affect the performance for other groups. “The other colleges have a comfort level in having 
CMC host the computing environment for the Joint Science Department, because we 
have an enterprise data center architecture that’s robust, resilient, and versatile,” says 
Humes. 

© 2011 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

Increased IT Efficiency  
Automated provisioning and the ability to manage all servers, storage, and connectivity from a unified interface 
minimizes management overhead, an important consideration because, like most colleges and universities, CMC 
has a relatively small IT staff. “Reducing the time we spend on repetitive tasks like provisioning frees up time to 
focus on service-level agreements and innovation,” says Whaley.  
 
Support for Green Initiatives 
In addition to supporting campus computing initiatives, the Vblock 0 system reduces energy consumption. Its 
small footprint supports CMC's pursuit of LEED Gold certification for the building that houses the new data center. 
The Cisco UCS included in Vblock Infrastructure Platforms has the high memory capacity to support a large 
number of virtual machines on each blade server, reducing the amount of physical equipment to power and cool.  
 
Next Steps 
Disaster recovery has become a priority at The Claremont Colleges, and campus leaders regard the Vblock 0 
system as an important ingredient. The current plan is to consolidate storage from The Claremont Colleges on the 
Vblock 0 system, and then replicate virtual machines and data over the WAN to a private cloud service provider.  

 
Hume concludes, “The Vblock system is a natural stepping stone between traditional IT infrastructure and future 
cloud environments, when physical resources might not reside on campus at all. Deploying the Vblock system 
demonstrated to campus leaders that we’re moving to the cloud, while still being grounded in the reality that we 
need on-campus resources. 
 
Product and Services List 
  Vblock 0 System 

o  Cisco Unified Computing System 
o  Cisco Nexus® 1000v software switch 
o  EMC Celerra Unified Storage 
o  VMware vSphere 

 
 
 
 
ABOUT VCE 
VCE, the Virtual Computing Environment Company formed by Cisco and EMC with investments from VMware and 

Intel, accelerates the adoption of converged infrastructure and cloud-based computing models that dramatically 

reduce the cost of IT while improving time to market for our customers. VCE, through the Vblock platform, delivers 

the industry's first completely integrated IT offering with end-to-end vendor accountability. VCE's prepackaged 

solutions are available through an extensive partner network, and cover horizontal applications, vertical industry 

offerings, and application development environments, allowing customers to focus on business innovation instead 

of integrating, validating and managing IT infrastructure. 
For more information, go to www.vce.com. 

 

 
Copyright © 2011 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, 
LLC. and/or its affiliates in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. 

  

© 2011 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

