MOBILE DATA SOLUTIONS CASE 
STUDY 

 

       

 

 
Leading world-wide supplier of mobile data 
solutions deploys VirtualWisdom to monitor its 

SAN to help ensure 100% data availability 

Overview  
This U.S.-based provider of mobile data solutions enables wireless carriers and enterprises 
around the world to deliver high-value, highly personalized mobile data services to their 
subscribers and consumers. It provides a comprehensive suite of hosted, managed service 
offerings which enable wireless carriers and enterprises to deliver customized, branded mobile 
data experiences to millions of subscribers. 

At the center of the services solution is a carrier-grade platform that enables consumers to easily 
reach the information, content and applications that matter most to them on a real-time basis. 
The platform delivers a complete solution, including portal, marketplace, connect, search, 
managed web, mobile campaign management, messaging, billing and settlement. All of these 
services are delivered on a hosted, managed service basis, to provide wireless carrier and 
enterprise customers with a cost-effective means to meet the challenges of the increasingly 
complex mobile data ecosystem. 
IT Environment  
The IT staff supports almost 2 PB of online data in several datacenters with over 125 HP servers.  
Storage is primarily HP EVA and secondarily, NetApp Filers, supporting over 60 storage ports.  
The primary datacenter supports two Brocade fabrics. VMware ESX hosts are deployed though 
not yet supporting the primary database –based applications.   Like many IT departments, this 

 

 

  

Challenges:  
• 

• 

• 

Pressure on IT staff to do 
more with existing CAPEX and 
OPEX 
Availability requirements 
dictate the need to predict 
problems before they 
escalate to application 
slowdowns or outages 
Being alerted to failing 
components and quickly 
replacing them before users 
are impacted  

Solution:  
• 

Virtual Instruments 
VirtualWisdom ProbeSW and 
professional services 
QuickStart Assessment 
Consulting 

Customer Benefits:  
•  With VirtualWisdom, causes 
of potential application slow-
downs can be identified and 
corrective action provided 
before users are even aware 
of a problem 

Productivity of existing staff is 
maximized, to ensure that 
issues are quickly identified 
and remediated without 
wasted time 

VirtualWisdom enables a 
reduction in the need to 
replace suspected bad SAN 
components because of 
superior fault diagnosis, 
which saves on both CAPEX 
and OPEX 

• 

• 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

MOBILE DATA SOLUTIONS CASE 
STUDY 

 

       

  

team is challenged with tight budgets and with getting more and more performance out of 
existing hardware assets and personnel.  The SAN team’s success is measured by a simple 
metric: keep the data available.  So taking a purely reactive approach to SAN troubleshooting 
and performance optimization was out of the question.   
Solution Evaluation  
Like many IT shops, they were challenged with tight budgets and with getting maximum 
productivity from existing resources – hardware, software, and personnel.  To do this, IT knew it 
must be proactive; it had to avoid problems and anticipate issues before the application owners 
felt the pain.  The only way to do this without increasing the staff size was to find some way to 
proactively automate the monitoring and analysis of the SAN to ensure application availability.   

The company looked at several solutions, including the SAN management tools from their 
system, switch, and storage vendors, and settled on Virtual Instruments’ VirtualWisdom 
ProbeSW software in late 2010.  The company wanted a solution that was: 

• 

• 

• 

Capable of seeing physical layer issues in the SAN to help predict problems before they 
became serious 

Flexible, so reporting and alerting could be tweaked to ensure that the staff would not be 
bombarded with meaningless data, but would not miss critical events  

Easily implemented in stages, allowing them to meter the degree of sophistication in their 
SAN management architecture, as resources allowed 

•  Hardware agnostic and vendor-neutral  
Role of VirtualWisdom 
A more proactive approach to system availability was needed, and in early 2011, this IT team 
deployed VirtualWisdom ProbeSW software.  After the initial installation service, VI completed 
the second half of the QuickStart Service.  Together, VI and the customer established a baseline 
of metrics, and developed additional reports and alerts using custom filters.   VirtualWisdom 
sees loss of sync, link resets, packet discards, aborts, code violations, and CRC errors and can 
send alarms for out-of-bounds conditions.   
SAN QuickStart Assessment  
Virtual Instruments was initially engaged to help provide visibility into the Fibre Channel SAN on 
an ongoing basis to assist with troubleshooting issues and finding root cause.  During the 
analysis period, VirtualWisdom identified several configuration, connectivity and capacity 
planning items for review.  Very often VI finds that storage-related outages and/or performance 
incidents are not caused by a single issue but are the result of multiple, seemingly unrelated 
issues in the environment. The net result is that the SAN infrastructure, running in a somewhat 
vulnerable state is not able to deal with additional issues as they arise resulting in outages or 
“brownouts”.   Some of the initial findings and recommendations: 

Multipath balancing 

The multipath verification and redundancy showed that 45% of the HBAs were balanced 
while 21% were Active/Active but not balanced.  17% of the ports were found to have no 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

“Virtual Wisdom provides 
critical information about 
storage infrastructure that 

is not available from 
traditional monitoring 

solutions.  We have found 
that the ProbeSW solution, 
when used in tandem with 

host and array-based 
monitoring, provides a 

holistic picture of utilization 
and capacity at the host, 
fabric, and disk level.” 

IT Manager 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

MOBILE DATA SOLUTIONS CASE 
STUDY 

       

  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

 
traffic to either redundant HBA.   10% of the servers were configured as Active/Passive. 5% of 
the HBAs were found not to have a peer HBA that could be identified   Often half, if not more, 
of the cost of the infrastructure is in place to eliminate single points of failure and reduce risk. 
Environments that aren’t properly configured can lose all of the advantages of a redundant 
environment while still incurring the full cost both in terms of hardware and administrative 
overhead.  Additionally, unbalanced configurations can cause one fabric to handle more than 
its share of the workload and increase the likelihood of congestion.  VI recommended that 
the environment should be reviewed to ensure that all servers are performing per their 
configuration and that the HBAs that don’t have a peer don’t require redundancy or actually 
have peers, but the nicknames didn’t match. The imbalanced HBAs should be checked to 
ensure they are all zoned to the same storage array or are behaving as expected 

Multipath Balancing Report Graph 

Inconsistent port alias naming 

 

During the multipath verification process it was identified that there are different naming 
schemes for port aliases in use on the SAN.  While the environment is small, these sorts of 
naming inconsistencies can be a mild nuisance.  However, as the environment grows these 
issues can lead to operational errors due to misunderstanding the role of a specific port.  VI 
recommended that a naming scheme policy be implemented immediately.  Ports whose 

 

 

MOBILE DATA SOLUTIONS CASE 
STUDY 

 
names do not adhere to the policy should be renamed for clarity. 

       

 

Connectivity - Events and Errors 

There were a small number of CRC errors identified.  Servers and applications were 
being forced to retransmit data affecting overall performance and health of the 
environment.  VI recommended that the links experiencing CRCs should have the SFPs 
and cables examined for issues and replaced as needed.   

Port 

Number 

Attached Port WWN  Attached 
Device 
Type 

Channel 

Probe 
Name 

Attached Port Name 

CRC 
Errors 

329 
1784 
1252 
610 
2533 
1244 

27704505331EA3EQQ  Switch 
80000044C4901782  Server 
3401440051E03X728  Switch 
1 0 2 2 4 3 C 9 8 2 4 1 B C  Server 
501 456 11E 03 B8D D   Switch 
501E200151E5E4R49  Switch 

Ch 2 
Ch 2 
Ch 2 
Ch 2 
Ch 2 
Ch 2 

GSW-PSF  y20115551rt5e0ff 
GSW-PSF  yhiiio6_m2_p1_a 
GSW-PSF  p20145051a55b718 
GSW-PSF  qarttxkkbcl01p_2_a 
GSW-PSF 
r50165051e03b8gt 
r0122251e5e4d49 
GSW-PSF 

179 
7 
3 
2 
1 
1 

Connectivity and Errors - Physical Layer Errors:  CRC Errors 

Connectivity – Flapping Ports 

Four ports were identified as “flapping”.  These ports showed continuous Loss of Sync 
(LOS) / Loss of Signal (LOSIG) events, roughly 1 LOS event every 5 minutes per port for 
the duration of the analysis period.  This sort of continual resetting at a minimum 
requires switch resources to deal with and in extreme cases can impact the stability of 
the switch and fabric.   VI recommended that these ports should be unplugged from the 
SAN or disabled, noting that there was no valid communication over these ports since 
VirtualWisdom was implemented, and so whatever is plugged into these ports serves 
no business purpose.   

Capacity Planning - Under Utilization and Pockets of Congestion 

The analysis revealed that the SAN was underutilized. This is a very common finding in 
SANs across the globe. Historically, without sufficient visibility, companies have opted 
to over-provision with a goal of avoiding problems and due to the lack of necessary 
information to fully utilize the environment.  There were a small number of specific 
hosts, ISLs, and array ports in the environment that occasionally exceeded 50% 
utilization, however, the remaining were underutilized.   

For instance, approximately 28% of the storage ports accounted for 84% of the storage 
read traffic SAN.  Based on this information, it is best to consolidate storage ports.  At 
the bare minimum, this information allows a storage administrator to select quiet 
storage ports for future allocations, thus helping spread the load on the storage ports 
more evenly.   

Infrastructure was not being utilized to the fullest extent. While at the same time that 
the majority of the environment goes underutilized, portions of it are congested 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

MOBILE DATA SOLUTIONS CASE 
STUDY 

 
thereby not delivering the performance that the environment could provide if the load 
were more evenly distributed.  VI recommended that SAN I/O bandwidth should be 
integrated into the capacity planning and storage provisioning processes. Simply by 
selecting and zoning to the least utilized ports when provisioning, new storage the 
environment can grow in balance and be fully utilized. 

Lessons Learned 
When asked what he would recommend to new VirtualWisdom customers, the IT Manager 
offered this suggestion:  “As your storage infrastructure grows, be sure to rely on VW to ensure 
proper health and configuration, such as device naming, load balancing, port errors, etc., as it is 
much easier to correct issues at the outset than after a device is already put into service.  In 
addition, dedicate time for your engineers to learn how to effectively use the Virtual Wisdom 
software, as the reporting interface is very powerful and therefore potentially complex.” 

 
 

 

 

 

       

  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 25 Metro Drive, Suite 400  

 

San Jose, CA 95110  
 
Sales Information  
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
 
Customer Support  
support@virtualinstruments.com  
www.virtualinstruments.com 
 
 
©2011 Virtual Instruments. All rights 
reserved. Features and specifications are 
subject to change without notice 12/11 
 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

