Case Study 

 

 

U.S. Agency Uses VirtualWisdom® and a Health Audit 
Service engagement to Optimize the VMware vSphere 
and Fiber Channel SAN Environment 

IT Environment 

The Agency datacenter environment consists of blade servers running VMware’s vSphere, 
Brocade 5100 switches, and EMC CLARiiON storage arrays. 

IT Challenges 

The primary areas of optimization focus are resource contention, utilization, performance, and 
potential root cause(s) for outages/slowdowns affecting the applications in the data center. 
The Agency wishes to increase their ability to proactively prevent potential issues which could 
result in slower application performance or SAN outages.  

Solution Deployment 

The Virtual Instruments Health Audit Service was implemented in Spring 2011.  Metrics were 
gathered for 15 days, after which the VI PS team delivered the Audit report to the Agency IT 
management team.   The Health Audit Service is designed to measure, analyze and make 
recommendations on resource contention, utilization, performance, and potential root cause(s) 
for outages/slowdowns.  

VirtualWisdom Value 

Once deployed, VirtualWisdom became an indispensible SAN optimization tool for the team.  
The value they see is focused around 4 areas: 
1.  SAN Resiliency – VirtualWisdom collects and reports on the existence of congestion.  
Also, VirtualWisdom detects if conditions exist that would affect the fault-tolerance and 
resilience of the data paths within the fabric. One example of this is where disk 
multipathing is used (e.g. a host has access to a disk LUN over multiple paths) but one of 
the paths may not be active or the paths are over 50% utilized, in which case a path 
outage would result in the remaining path being saturated.  

 

 

SUMMARY 

Challenges:  

•  Diagnosing SAN 
problems with a 
“trial and error” 
approach 

•  Implementing new 

projects and 
infrastructure with 
a limited ability to 
determine the 
impact in uptime 
and performance 

Solution:  

•  Virtual 

Instruments 
VirtualWisdom 
and the Virtual 
Instruments 
Health Audit 
Service 

Customer Benefits:  

•  Application 

Performance and 
SAN Resiliency –
VirtualWisdom 
collects and 
reports on I/O 
transaction 
performance and 
latency as well as 
detects the 
existence of 
congestion   

•  Problem 

Resolution – 
VirtualWisdom is 
used to bring 
quicker resolution 
to issues with the 
SAN 

•  Proactive 

Monitoring - 
VirtualWisdom is 
used to monitor 
the SAN and 

VirtualInstruments.com 

 

For all the servers that are running multiple-HBA ports, the goal is to have both HBAs with 
I/O loads within a certain range of equality if they are configured in an Active/Active 
fashion. Similarly, the traffic should be balanced on all the multi-pathed ISL (if applicable) 
and storage ports. It is important to optimize performance but it is even more critical to 
ensure that the active paths are not single points of failure. Any failure on the only active 
port could cause a complete outage to the applications supported by these devices. 

VirtualWisdom’s multipath verification and redundancy showed that 2.3% of the HBAs are 
balanced while 56.8% are Active/Active but not balanced. The other 18.2% of the servers 
are configured as Active/Passive. Peers could not be identified for 4.5% of the HBAs.  VI 
recommended that the environment should be reviewed to ensure that all servers are 
performing per their configuration.  Also, they should find HBAs that don’t have peers, 
don’t require redundancy, or are actually do have peers with mismatched nicknames. The 
imbalanced HBAs should be checked to verify that they are all zoned to the same storage 
array or are behaving as expected.  Report graph follows: 

 
 
 

provide proactive 
alerts based on 
specific 
measurement 
thresholds and 
events 

•  Predictive Cost 

Containment 
VirtualWisdom is 
used to help 
optimize existing 
SAN infrastructure 

 

 

2.  Performance optimization.  VirtualWisdom collects and reports on I/O transaction 

performance and latency and detects the existence of congestion.  Though the 
infrastructure response times in the Agency environment are acceptable, as exchanges 
time averaged less than 10 ms., VirtualWisdom detected a recurring nightly pattern of high 
latency around 22:20 hours. In some servers, the traffic congestion results in average 
exchanges reaching 200ms. The duration of high latency lasted for about 8 to 20 minutes 
depending on clusters.  

In the graph below, the SAN Performance Probe Performance Trend dashboard shows 
high latency starting at 22:00 nightly. The one-hour Summary shows periodic events over 
multiple days.   

2                                                    VIRTUAL INSTRUMENTS CUSTOMER CASE STUDY 
 

 

 

Additionally, VMware Distributed Resource Scheduler (DRS) takes note of utilization 
disparity and moves VMs back and forth between servers every other day. DRS was 
detecting the nightly spikes and was using its algorithms to move workload around, but 
due to the nature of the workload it was not an effective balancing of workload. It appears 
that DRS was just creating more work for the cluster by performing these VMotion 
activities. The DRS threshold level was reviewed to make sure that it was working as 
intended.   

3.  Proactive Monitoring - VirtualWisdom is used to monitor the infrastructure and provide 

proactive alerts based on specific measurement thresholds and events. HBA queue depths 
are used to manage the maximum number of outstanding commands at any one time from 
an HBA to a storage port and/or LUN. VirtualWisdom identified several servers with queue 
depths that are set higher than are generally recommended. In a non-virtualized server 
environment, a queue depth setting of 8 or less may be appropriate to allow servers in the 
shared environment to have equal access to the same storage port. This helps reduce the 
number of slow-draining devices in the SAN. In the Agency environment, several servers 
which were not part of clusters appeared to have queue depth settings higher (32) than 
typically recommended. 

4. 

 Predictive Cost Containment – VirtualWisdom is used to help optimize existing 
infrastructure (and thereby reduce or delay the requirement for future investment) as well 
as serve as a baseline to provide valuable I/O workload input in future infrastructure 
strategic architecture and design decisions.  VI found that the Agency SAN is largely 
underutilized with some pockets of high utilization. This is not unusual and in fact, is a 
common situation in nearly every SAN environment that VI reviews.  At the Agency, 
storage ports’ average utilization peaked at 46% while one-week average utilization of the 
busiest ports averaged 2.9%. Even with overall low utilization, load balancing between 
storage ports will help smooth out the pockets of high demand, improving overall system 
stability during peak demand. 

Summary 

As the Agency’s operation continues to grow, the challenge of ensuring that mission-critical 
storage networks are, available 24x7 without disruption will also increase.  VirtualWisdom 
enables administrators to set up alarms and trigger events to closely monitor and responded 
to critical SAN links (ISL, RDF, etc).  VirtualWisdom’s reporting capability allows users to create 
a report card for the environment on a timeframe of their choosing.  VirtualWisdom increases 
resource utilization, storage and server administrator operational efficiency, allowing the 
Agency to automatically monitor virtualized servers and SAN health while proactively avoiding 
congestion and bottlenecks without having to increase head count. 
 

3                                                    VIRTUAL INSTRUMENTS CUSTOMER CASE STUDY 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Corporate Headquarters 
25 Metro Drive Suite 400 
San Jose, CA 95110 
Phone:  408-579-4000 
Fax:  408-579-4001 

 

Sales 
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Phone:  408-579-4081 

Support 
support@virtualinstruments.com 
 

©2011 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are 
trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or servicemarks 
of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 9/19/11 

4                                                    VIRTUAL INSTRUMENTS CUSTOMER CASE STUDY 
 

