Is 2012 the year for desktop or client-side virtualization? According to Gartner, as of mid-2011, at least 40% of x86 architecture workloads have been virtualized on servers.1 This is good news for desktop virtualization, as many "rms look to extend the bene"ts of virtualization to their end users. And a study from September 2011 by Forrester found that, while most organizations’ existing deployments touch less than 500 employees today, they have plans to scale these deployments to thousands — and ultimately tens of thousands — of users over the next two years.2 Now consensus holds that virtual desktop infrastructure (VDI) adoption rates are up across the enterprise sector, with large-scale businesses turning to desktop virtualization solutions to tackle complex desktop environments, security and compliance issues, and an increasingly mobile workforce. But are small and mid-sized businesses (SMBs) also adopting desktop virtualization, and is the SMB marketplace poised for explosive growth?To determine whether or not SMBs are primed to adopt desktop virtualization as part of their end user computing strategy in 2012, Spiceworks and VMware conducted a study that included surveys as well as data from the 1.9 M members of Spiceworks. Spiceworks is the world’s largest social business network for IT professionals. This particular social network o#ers free network management software coupled with an active forum for discussion around all things IT. For perspective on the activity level in this community, in 2011 alone IT professionals spent almost three billion minutes in Spiceworks, making it one of the most active sites in the IT industry.Trends around Desktop Virtualization for Small and Mid-sized OrganizationsA Spiceworks Market Insights Report Commissioned by VMwareApril 2012Voice of IT  TM2Trends around Desktop Virtualization for Small and Mid-sized OrganizationsChallenges facing SMBs.Based on the results of the "rst survey, which included responses from 249 SMB IT professionals, it is clear that SMBs and enterprise-class organizations face many of the same challenges when it comes to managing end users — with security and compliance topping the list. This bodes well for desktop virtualization, as customers turn to desktop virtualization to meet security and compliance mandates by moving data o# of end points and into the datacenter where it can be more e$ciently and securely managed.Figure 1 Spiceworks Community Survey December 2011What are the biggest challenges your IT organization faces in managingend users? (ranked in order with 1 being the biggest challenge)Figure 10%10%20%% of respondents who answered 1 or 230%40%50%60%Maintaining security and compliance48%Lack of people/resources to do everything that is being asked44%Finding enough budget to refresh hardware and end point devices37%Application/OS patching and updates32%Supporting a wide range of devices23%Managing users across remote locations20%3Trends around Desktop Virtualization for Small and Mid-sized OrganizationsWindows and VDI adoption. However, in contrast to the enterprise sector, Windows upgrades won’t be a driving catalyst for desktop virtualization adoption with SMB customers this year. When polled, more than 50 percent of those surveyed responded that they won’t be upgrading their operating systems in the next 12 months.While this data may suggest, as shown in Figure 2, that the 39 percent who are “not looking at this” have already upgraded to Windows 7, this is more than likely not the case.  A Tech Target 2012 IT priorities survey found that Windows 7 is the main focus for IT decision makers this year, but this may be more in line with enterprise customers than those in the SMB segment.3   Figure 2Spiceworks Community Survey December 2011When are you looking to upgrade your Windows operating system?Figure 239%17%21%16%7%1-2 months3-6 months6-12 months12+ monthsNot looking at this4Trends around Desktop Virtualization for Small and Mid-sized OrganizationsSoftware as a Service (SaaS) in SMBs.SaaS usage among SMBs provides another informative data point around desktop virtualization adoption. Today, SaaS is being heavily leveraged in organizations to deliver Google Apps, CRM software, marketing and analytics, HR, and collaboration tools to end users.   According to Gartner, Inc. SaaS-based delivery will experience healthy growth through 2015, when worldwide revenue is projected to reach $22.1 billion.4But has the move towards SaaS taken hold yet in the SMB space? It appears that the answer to this is “not yet” or perhaps “not across the board.” Approximately 76 percent of SMBs access less than one-quarter of their applications (sometimes, much less as Figure 3 indicates) through the cloud. Given the strong uptake of SaaS in organizations of all sizes, both the number of SMBs using SaaS and the number of SaaS applications each SMB uses is bound to grow over time. However, the current survey results indicate that SMBs still use a signi"cant number of Windows and legacy applications in their current day-to-day operations.These circumstances augment the case for desktop virtualization in SMBs. Moreover, this will likely drive a large number of SMB customers to leverage desktop and application virtualization to bridge legacy investments as they move beyond Windows to the cloud.What percentage of your end user facing applicationsare SaaS/web-based applications today?Figure 30%10%20%30%40%50%70%60%76-100%51-75%26-50%11-25%0-10%5%9%10%24%52%Figure 3Spiceworks Community Survey December 20115Trends around Desktop Virtualization for Small and Mid-sized OrganizationsVDI adoption rates.Given the above trends and challenges facing SMBs, it is not surprising that more than 60 percent of customers are planning to roll out or evaluate desktop virtualization in 2012. However, while 12 percent of SMBs are considering hosted desktop virtualization solutions to o#set the costs and time needed to manage IT operations on-premise, 88 percent of SMBs — the vast majority — state a preference around implementing and managing these solutions in-house. Interestingly, despite this preference, many of those surveyed also reported they are faced with a shortage of available manpower and resources. Scarce headcount and tight budgets coupled with the desire to manage deployments in-house indicate that SMBs will likely gravitate to VDI storage and compute appliances, along with “VDI in a box” solutions to keep things simple. Pivot 3, v3 and Nutanix all o#er a#ordable VDI solutions to take SMB customers quickly from proof of concept to production. Figure 4Spiceworks Community Survey December 2011Have you evaluated cloud-based computing anddesktop virtualization in your organization?Figure 40%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%27%24%39%10%Yes we have evaluated and plan to deploy a solution in 2012Yes, we are in the process of evaluatingNo, but we plan to evaluate in 2012No, and we have no plans toFigure 5Spiceworks Community Survey December 2011If you move to desktop virtualization and cloud computing,what type of solution will you implement?Figure 50%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%On-premise solution that you manageHosted virtual desktop solution that is managed by a 3rd party(e.g. service provider)12%88%6Trends around Desktop Virtualization for Small and Mid-sized OrganizationsDesktop virtualization vendor preference in SMB’s. For the second part of the study, we investigated how desktop virtualization vendors stack up in SMB IT environments today. This investigation included data about VDI agent deployments among more than 4,000 members of the Spiceworks Community as well as a survey "elded to the same members. The results show VMware View® leading in the number of deployed desktops with over half of the virtual desktop installations, (Figure 6). Additionally, from an SMB industry perspective, "nance, education, government, healthcare and manufacturing all showed a higher propensity to install and use desktop virtualization.As part of the second survey, we also asked a subset of the 4,000 customers why they selected the brand they deployed. Responses indicated that brand preference was due to products having speci"c features needed by company, the reputation of the vendor and price.In conclusion, we believe our study shows a strong case for an increasing and important role for desktop virtualization in SMB environments. There are important operational and productivity bene"ts driving this trend, and desktop virtualization is well poised to be a major component of SMB IT in 2012 as "rms look to bridge legacy investments and move beyond the Windows PC.Figure 6Spiceworks MarketViewDecember 2011Desktop Virtualization Installations — December 2011Figure 6VMware View AgentCitrix Virtual Desktop AgentNComputing vSpaceQuest vWorkspacePano Direct ServiceKaviza Desktop Agent53%27%8%5%4%3%Trends around Desktop Virtualization for Small and Mid-sized Organizations

1 Gartner “Magic Quadrant for x86 Server Virtualization Infrastructure,” Thomas J. Bittman, George J. Weiss, Mark A. 
Margevicius and Philip Dawson, June 30, 2011. Gartner does not endorse any vendor, product or service depicted 
in its research publications, and does not advise technology users to select only those vendors with the highest 
ratings. Gartner research publications consist of the opinions of Gartner’s research organization and should not 
be construed as statements of fact. Gartner disclaims all warranties, expressed or implied, with respect to this 
research, including any warranties of merchantability or "tness for a particular purpose.

2 The Client Virtualisation Imperative, A Forrester Consulting Thought Leadership Paper Commissioned By 
Dimension Data, September 2011

3 TechTarget, “2012 IT Priorities,” Mark Schlack, January 12, 2012

4 Gartner, “Forecast: Software as a Service, All Regions, 2010-2015, 1H12 Update,” Sharon A. Mertz, Chad Eschinger, 
Tom Eid, Chris Pang, Hai Hong Swinehart, Yanna Dharmasthira, Laurie F. Wurster, Tsuyoshi Ebina, Akimasa Nakao, 
March 13 2012

About Spiceworks

Spiceworks™,   the world’s largest social business platform for IT, connects 1.8 million IT professionals with more 
than 900 technology brands. By combining a Facebook-like community with free IT management software, 
Spiceworks helps businesses to discover, buy and manage $315 billion worth of technology products and 
services each year.

For more information visit:
http://www.spiceworks.com/marketing/insights/

The contents in this report are a result of primary research performed by Spiceworks. Unless otherwise noted, the entire contents 
distributed as part of this report are copyrighted by Spiceworks. As such any information made available by any means in this report may 
not be copied, reproduced, duplicated, published, displayed, transmitted, distributed, given, sold, traded, resold, marketed, o#ered for sale, 
modi"ed to create derivative works or otherwise exploited for valuable consideration without prior written consent by Spiceworks. For 
more information email insights@spiceworks.com.

This report contains information of fact relating to parties other than Spiceworks. Although the information have been obtained from, and 
are based on sources that Spiceworks believes to be reliable, Spiceworks does not guarantee the accuracy, and any such information might 
be incomplete or condensed. Any estimates included in this report constitute Spiceworks’ judgment as of the date of compilation, and are 
subject to change without notice. This report is for information purposes only. All responsibility for any interpretations or actions based on 
the information or commentary contained within this report lie solely with the recipient.

All rights reserved. 2012.

7

