1

Large Financial Services 
CASE STUDY

Challenges
• 

Scaling up the IT environment to meet 
business requirements for continual expan-
sion of financial services while maintaining 
a tight ‘return-on-investment’ model.
Ramping up VMware ESX servers cre-
ated serious performance issues and 
outages.
Expensive production storage and server 
components were limited to non-produc-
tion usage due to performance issues.
Internal application, storage, and VM-
ware server teams as well as external 
storage and server vendor personnel 
were spending hundreds of hours per 
month trying to rectify problems. 

Solution
Virtual Instruments VirtualWisdom 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Virtual Instruments ProbeV
Virtual Instruments ProbeVM 
Virtual Instruments TAP 
Virtual Instruments ProbeFCX
Virtual Instruments ROVER
Virtual Instruments Protocol Analyzer 

Virtual Instruments Virtual Infrastructure Opti-
mization & Best Practices Service

Virtual Instruments VirtualWisdom 
Solution and Professional Services 
help resolve VMwareTM performance 
problems at Large Financial Services 
Company

VirtualWisdom enables ‘end-to-end’ view of I/O from VMware ESX Server through 
SAN to disk array

The large financial services company is a major international provider of financial services 
and investment resources that help individuals and institutions meet their financial objec-
tives. In addition to more than 300+ mutual funds, this company also offers discount 
brokerage services, retirement services, estate planning, wealth management, securities 
execution and clearance, life insurance and is continually expanding services to meet 
customer needs. 

The company had built out a large set of servers, Fibre Channel SANs, and Tier 1 storage 
in order to setup a flexible environment for implementing virtualized physical servers. By us-
ing VMware ESX, time to market for expanding business applications would be faster and 
lower-cost than the traditional model of one application per physical server. 

As the number of virtualized servers increased, the SAN infrastructure and connected 
Tier 1 storage exhibited serious problems to the point of full production outages requiring 
reboots of storage and/or servers. So much so that non-production test and development 
servers had to be shut down to prevent congestion and retries every Sunday evening or 
periodically when problems appeared. Eventually, all production applications were moved 
to other environments to mitigate the business impact of the SAN problems.  

For a period of eight months, the application, VMware server and storage IT teams, along 
with personnel from their storage and server vendors worked through a litany of problems 
all impacting the SAN.    

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Benefits
• 

Restored use of expensive storage and 
server components to production use, 
using best practices to optimize perfor-
mance and avoid performance issues 
and outages.
Have gained full understanding of the I/O 
performance impact of VMware VMotion, 
VMware Distributed Resource Scheduler 
(DRS) and VMware High Availability (HA).
Development of best practices for con-
figuration and deployment of VMware 
ESX virtual machines and servers with 
their SAN.
Dramatically reduced the admin resourc-
es and effort needed to monitor and 
troubleshoot the environment from ESX 
server to storage array.

2

Large Financial Services 
CASE STUDY

VirtualWisdom Professional 
Services worked with 
the company’s storage 
administration personnel 
to develop ‘best practices’ 
around queue depth settings 
on the in-house storage. 

 

The financial services company found that their point solution monitoring tools for VMware, Fibre 
Channel switches, and storage arrays could not provide the information needed to resolve a 
number of problems. These tools could only provide a limited view of the environment and none 
provided insight into the Fibre Channel communications network. The company’s IT personnel 
realized that they needed to see the ‘end-to-end’ I/O between the servers and the storage ar-
rays to understand the impact of adding VMware virtual machines was having on the SAN.  

The company identified Virtual Instruments’ VirtualWisdom as a possible solution to its SAN 
monitoring problems and to directly help address their issues. Because the problems centered 
on VMware ESX servers, the Virtual Instruments ProbeVM was essential as it provided I/O in-
formation for each virtual machine and ESX server. I/O utilization data from the virtual machines 
and ESX servers could be correlated with I/O information from the SAN into a single view to 
optimize performance and accelerate problem resolution. 

Virtual Instruments’ VirtualWisdom solution was installed and monitored by Virtual Instruments 
Professional Services. Monitoring of the VMware ESX virtual machines and servers together with 
the SAN revealed a number of issues that were affecting performance and availability.

QuEuE DEpth SEttINgS
VirtualWisdom showed that part of the latency issue was caused by incorrect Queue Depth 
settings. During configuration, the queue depth settings were set too high on the storage array 
Fibre Channel ports and this resulted in increasing latencies for various applications. Virtual-
Wisdom Professional Services worked with the company’s storage administration personnel to 
develop ‘best practices’ around queue depth settings on the in-house storage. 

Over the course of the problem the storage vendor changed their recommendation for Queue 
Depth settings. It was believed that this would help alleviate some of the problems. It wasn’t 
clear if this change merely masked the underlying problem or if it had a direct impact on resolv-
ing it. It also wasn’t clear what impact this change had on overall virtual infrastructure perfor-
mance for all applications.

VirtualWisdom showed that this change did indeed improve latency in the SAN environment 
without impacting the overall latency as seen by the servers. Nevertheless, it showed that the 
Queue Depth settings by themselves did not resolve the problem for all applications in the 
environment or impact the reservation conflict storms seen when VMotion was applied to a SAN 
under load. 

uNEVENLy prOVISIONED StOrAgE pOrtS
VirtualWisdom demonstrated that the server demand was not evenly distributed across the stor-
age array controller ports. On an array with 32 ports there were two ports that were at or near 
the upper limit of utilization. A handful of ports had moderate traffic while the remainder had little 
or no traffic load to speak of (less than 3% on average). With proper layout it was assessed that 
the same performance could easily be achieved by having only half as many storage ports. 

The customer plans to use VirtualWisdom going forward to layout the load evenly across the 
storage to maximize utilization, optimize performance and avoid unnecessary purchases of ad-
ditional SAN hardware. 

3

Large Financial Services 
CASE STUDY

Other benefits that were derived 
from the VirtualWisdom solution and 
professional services included:

• 

• 

Utilization of the existing vir-
tual IT infrastructure could be 
improved through tuning and 
optimization
Ongoing monitoring, reporting 
and alerting with VirtualWisdom 
is in the process of being imple-
mented to ensure that perfor-
mance continues to be optimal 
and uninterrupted as the user 
requirements in this environment 
changes over time.

DELAyED Or DrOppED trAFFIC
One of the working theories by one of the storage vendors was that incompatibility between the 
switches was the causing traffic to be dropped and was the source of the poor performance. 
VirtualWisdom was able to prove conclusively that no frames were being dropped. The physi-
cal layer was healthy and error free and all communication was completing successfully even 
though it was with significant performance issues. This enabled the customer to focus on the 
real root cause of the performance issues and not rely on the theories put forth by competing 
storage vendors. 

VMWArE VMOtION, DrS AND hA CAuSED SAN ‘rESEr VAtION StOrMS’ 
VirtualWisdom demonstrated that during higher load times such as virus scans and backups, 
VMotion and DRS can cause reservation storms that lead to unacceptable levels of latency and 
VMotion failures. More appropriate Queue Depth settings were used to mitigate the impact of 
these events. Care needs to be used that these settings don’t affect overall performance when 
VMotion is not actively moving a VM. VirtualWisdom helped the user select optimal settings that 
yielded good performance while minimizing the impact of VMotion. Even with proper settings, 
monitoring with alerts is required to ensure that when multiple clusters access the same storage 
they don’t cause outages while simply trying to optimize server memory. 

SuMMAry
The Virtual Instruments VirtualWisdom solution, including VirtualWisdom ProbeVM, along with 
Virtual Instruments Virtual Infrastructure Optimization and Best Practices Services, were able to 
help this leading financial services company to narrow down the sources of performance issues 
and enable fast resolution that helped drive VMware ESX virtual machines and servers into full 
production. This also had the benefit of increasing server consolidation ratios.

Moving forward the company’s application, storage, and VMware IT groups now have the confi-
dence that they can meet new business requirements in a timely and cost-effective fashion.

100 Enterprise Way, Suite C-3
Scotts Valley, CA 95066
Phone: 831-439-4000

Sales Information
sales@virtualinstruments.com
Phone: 831-439-4080

Customer Support
support@virtualinstruments.com
www.virtualinstruments.com

©2009 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice.         

 

 

 

 

03/09

