Vblock AT The heART oF $1 billion  

iT oVeRhAul AT FoRTune 100 FinAnciAl 

SeRViceS FiRm 

time to maRket iS key to deliveR on the Company’S goalS 

The board of Directors of a Fortune 100 financial services firm approved a $1 billion 
investment in new application development—the largest iT project in the company’s 
history. The goal is a new generation of applications that improve the customer 
experience and help the company extend its competitive advantage.    

The project is expected to support the needs of application developers across the 
company’s multiple sites and departments, and change the way the company develops 
and deploys applications to serve its needs for the next 10-15 years.  

To ensure time to market and a platform that could scale to meet long-term business 
needs, the company partnered with Vce.  

This major financial services firm is now well on its way to fielding the first of a new 
generation of customer applications that will support the business over the next 
decade, allowing it to leapfrog the competition in time.

finanCial SeRviCeS

Client
Financial Services Firm 

Challenge
Rapidly develop and deploy 
new generation of customer 
facing applications to regain 
market share 

Solution
Vblock Systems to speed 
time to market & provide 
consistent, easy to manage 
and reliable infrastructure

ReSultS
App development started  
in less than 30 days. Team 
delivering first new apps 
and moving aggressively  
to regain share 

www.vce.com

vCe customers reported 
“reducing staff time to  
configure/test/deploy by 
75%... reductions in infra-
structure hardware costs 
and iT staff time to manage 
operations that lowered the 
average annual data center 
cost by 68% per 100 users”  
— IDC, May 2012

the challenge 
A Fortune 100 financial services company 
was losing market share to competitors 
that moved ahead of them with the way 
they delivered applications and interacted 
with their users. To stem share losses 
and spring ahead of the competition, 
the company pulled 750 of its top iT 
talent into a new organization and gave 
them the mandate to redesign how the 
company developed and delivered new 
applications to users. To accomplish 
its goals, the group was looking for 
an infrastructure that could rapidly 
instantiate new application development 
and testing environments and that could 
facilitate the deployment and scaling 
of the applications developed in them. 
With the fast pace of the market, and the 
firm needing its developers to work on 
the new set of innovative products and 
services, time was of the essence. 

The existing iT systems were not up to 
the task: provisioning new development 
environments took 90+ days and the 
old way of managing iT infrastructure 
required too much time and effort on the 
part of the team.

the solution
Vce was able to deliver a Proof of 
concept (Poc) built upon its flagship 
Vblock™ Systems in less than 30 days. 
Within 2 days of arriving on site, the 
Vblock systems were up and running in 
the iT environment. Factory integration 
of industry-leading compute, network, 
storage, and virtualization management 
products from cisco, emc, and Vmware 
meant that the customer’s iT initiative 
could get off the ground quickly. in 
contrast, the competition was unable  
to show a working system by the end  
of the 45-day Poc period.

The customer chose Vmware’s vFabric 
tools to support the application 
development work of its developers. With 
vFabric on Vblock systems, developers 

can instantiate new development and 
testing environments in minutes, rather 
than months, and have a standard 
platform for staging and production. 

A total of 8 Vblock Series 700 mX 
systems were deployed across several 
data centers.  each Vblock 700mX was 
configured to support over 1,000 virtual 
machines.

the results
The hundreds of developers dedicated 
to this effort started work right on 
schedule—all systems were delivered 
and operational in less than 30 days. 
With Vblock systems, the company was 
able to focus its iT efforts on building a 
competitive advantage:

• Rapid deployment of Vblock systems 

saved the company more than 
$10 million per month in idle and 
underutilized personnel costs, and 
avoided the time and cost uncertainty 
of a services engagement. 

• The standard nature of Vblock systems 

made it possible for the financial 
services firm to reduce deployment 
risk and eliminate the time and cost of 
testing across different environments.  

• Applications performance is consistent 

on each move from development to 
testing to staging environments across 
all Vblock 700mX systems. 

• Vce™ Support provided a single point 

of contact for calls and accelerated 
issue resolution as the customer 
deployed the new platform across its  
iT environment.

The firm is now poised to regain market 
share, on its way to fielding the first new 
applications resulting from this major 
effort that is redefining how the company 
interacts with its customers. The success 
of this project is leading the company 
to expand the model to all its new 
application development efforts.

 
Copyright © 2012 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, LLC. and/or its  
affiliates in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

www.vce.com

the WoRld’S moSt advanCed ConveRged infRaStRuCtuRe

