FIRST NATIONAL BANK REDUCES DATA 

CENTER FOOTPRINT WITH VBLOCK 

South	aFRiCan	bank	migRateS	33,000	ex Change	mailboxeS	to	ReduCe 	
data	CenteR	Spa Ce	and	eneRgy	expendituReS	S aVing	30%	annually

First National Bank (FNB) is the third-largest bank in South Africa, providing 
personal, commercial, and corporate banking services to more than six million 
customers. With a history dating back to 1838, FNB has maintained its position by 
developing new products and services to meet market needs. This has led to an 
increasing dependence on IT services to keep the business running. 

With real estate prices on the rise, the cost of data center space was growing. IT 
realized they needed to be able to consolidate space and grow services without 
growing footprint. Their approach was to leverage a Microsoft Exchange migration 
to reign in data center growth while improving services to the business. 

FNB upgraded to Exchange 2010 and consolidated the entire email infrastructure 
onto Vblock™ Systems. The new infrastructure has provided FNB with improved 
performance, reliability, and streamlined maintenance along with the agility to 
support future Exchange requirements and additional applications.

FinanCial	SeRViCeS

	 Client

First National Bank, the 
third-largest bank in South 
Africa, serving six million 
customers

	 Challenge

Manage massive Exchange 
email rollout and enable 
more agile, scalable platform 
for growth 

	 Solution

Vblock Systems

	 ReSultS

Improve performance and 
reliability of Exchange 
platform and enable faster 
delivery of IT resources  
to support new product  
and services

www.vce.com

“In the financial services 
business, speed is of the 
essence. By accelerating 
back-end deployments, 
Vblock	Systems	can	help	us	
improve	time	to	market for 
our business managers when 
they launch new products 
and services.”  
— Tony Wilson, manager, 
Microsoft environment,  
First National Bank

the	Challenge
In recent years, the FNB’s employees 
have become more dependent on email 
to perform their job functions. As a result, 
FNB’s Exchange 2003 email infrastructure 
had grown across multiple sites in South 
Africa. As the Exchange environment 
was aging and becoming decentralized, 
the IT organization was increasingly 
consumed with managing email-related 
administration and maintaining availability. 

The lack of a reliable business continuity 
solution sometimes resulted in outages 
that impacted employee productivity. In 
fact, Exchange-related issues often took 
four or five hours to resolve.

With both real estate prices and 
support costs on the rise, the Exchange 
environment had become too costly  
and incapable of supporting the  
growing business. 

the	Solution
After closely evaluating various 
competitive solutions, FNB decided to 
implement two Vblock Systems to serve 
as the infrastructure for its Exchange 
2010 environment and 33,000 Exchange 
mailboxes. The infrastructure is completely 
virtualized with VMware vSphere.

Exchange is protected using Microsoft 
Exchange Server 2010 Database 
Availability Group (DAG) replication. 
For streamlined management, FNB uses 
VMware vCenter Operations Management 
Suite and EMC Unified Infrastructure 
Manager (UIM).

StorTech, the reseller and systems 
integrator, and VCE Professional  
Services worked with FNB to deploy  
the Vblock Systems. 

the	Results
With the Vblock Systems, FNB has 
successfully executed three major 
initiatives: an Exchange 2003 to 
Exchange 2010 upgrade, migration of 
33,000 mailboxes and consolidation  
of its Exchange infrastructure from  
12 to two sites. 

The Vblock Systems have enabled the 
bank to accelerate its journey to private 
cloud, reduce the company’s impact on 
the environment and gain tremendous 
agility in supporting growth and change. 
The new consolidated infrastructure 
has provided FBN with several specific 
improvements, including:

•  Reduced data center footprint by  

30% percent with a 40:18 consolidation 
ratio for Exchange servers. 

•  Achieved 30% in annual cost savings 

related to power, cooling and real 
estate expenditures.

•  Doubled CPU utilization to derive 

greater performance from its existing 
infrastructure and postpone future 
server upgrades.

•  Deployed disaster recovery solution, 

reducing RTO from 3 hours to  
just minutes. 

•  Reduced time to complete IT’s 

administration activities, such as 
patches and antivirus updates, by  
50 percent.

Because the Exchange project has  
been so successful, the bank’s IT 
organization is exploring use of the 
Vblock Systems to support other 
initiatives, including Infrastructure as  
a Service and virtual desktops. 

Looking ahead, the improved flexibility 
and scalability enabled by the Vblock 
Systems translates into tremendous 
business value for FNB especially as the 
bank considers running other application 
environments on the Vblock Systems.  
By being able to provision virtual 
machines in two to three hours versus 
four to six weeks for physical hardware, 
First National Bank expects business 
managers will be able to improve time  
to market when they launch new  
products and services and gain a  
valuable competitive advantage.

 
Copyright © 2012 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, LLC. and/or its  
affiliates in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

www.vce.com

the	WoRld’S	moSt	adVanCed	ConVeRged	inFRa StRuCtuRe

