Halifax Bank of Scotland  
 
CASE STUDY

Challenge
• 

Maintain a position as the UK’s 
largest mortgage and savings 
organization by providing cus-
tomers with a consistently good 
user experience with bank’s 
services

Solution
• 

Virtual Instruments VirtualWisdom 
SAN I/O Intelligence 

Beneﬁts
• 

Proactive problem resolution 
keeps the SAN architecture 
optimized and eliminated major 
problems from affecting banking 
operation
The ability to design optimal 
SAN storage that can be easily 
scaled over time

• 

Halifax Bank of Scotland (HBOS)

Halifax Bank of Scotland Uses Virtual Instruments’ NetWisdom Monitoring Tools to 
Help Manage its Ever-Expanding Storage Area Network (SAN)

The Halifax Bank of Scotland (HBOS) was formed through the merger of Halifax and Bank of 
Scotland on September 10, 2001. HBOS has assets of more than £400 million and is the UK’s 
largest mortgage and savings provider. As one of the UK’s leading ﬁnancial organizations, HBOS 
has a huge presence in the community not only through the products and services that it pro-
vides to individuals, but by employing more than 67,000 people.

With more than 22 million customers, HBOS has a relationship with two out of every ﬁve UK 
households. And HBOS takes its customer relationships very seriously. It prides itself on its 
ability to deliver new products and customer support services that are second to none. Part of 
this commitment entails a massive information technology infrastructure that helps ensure that 
customers have access to all of the information and banking services they might be seeking—
available 24 x 7.

In other words, system downtime is not acceptable. And that is no easy task when you consider 
that HBOS has more than 67,000 users accessing everything from Microsoft Exchange Servers 
to Oracle and SAS business intelligence and data warehousing applications. Hundreds of trans-
actional systems and back ofﬁce systems support the HBOS retail banking operations.

LARGE SAN
In its production storage area network (SAN) computing environment, HBOS maintains over 
3,000 SAN ports split across two data centers in West Yorkshire, England with more than 300 
Sun E15K servers running Solaris, 149 Brocade switches, and 250 Terabytes of Hitachi Data 
Systems Lightning 9900 V Series and Thunder 9500 V Series modular storage systems main-
tained in a split fabric conﬁguration. In addition to the Sun servers, HBOS also utilizes IBM p6 
90 Regatta servers running AIX and HP Integrity SuperDome servers running HP/UX. Veritas’ 
volume management software is used across platforms.

2

Halifax Bank of Scotland  
CASE STUDY

“None of the tools that we 
had been using to monitor 
our SAN’s performance 
could get us to the root 
of the problem, and some 
problems—in the early 
days—went unsolved,” 

And that’s just the HBOS production environment. HBOS also maintains a scaled down version 
of the main SAN fabric that is virtually identical to the production environment—down to the split 
fabric conﬁguration where all new releases and products are put through rigorous interoperability 
veriﬁcation testing. The test environment alone includes 142 servers.

“We greatly lessen the chance of a problem working its way into the production system if we 
have performed testing and analysis in a virtually identical pre-production environment,” said 
Simon Close, Technical Team Leader, Storage Management Services, Halifax Bank of Scotland 
Group Technology. “It has proved to be a key part of our overall IT successes.”

“It is a huge undertaking to efﬁciently operate a SAN of this size and complexity,” Close contin-
ued. “Even though we have worked hard to standardize on certain technologies across the en-
terprise, the reality is that to optimally run a banking operation of our scope requires supporting 
a diverse heterogeneous computing environment running a multitude of operating systems and 
a wide variety of applications,” Close said, who in his role at HBOS is responsible for developing 
and championing the adoption of SAN best practice and service improvement initiatives.

“Application changes, operating system patches, or simply adding servers or storage modules 
are just a few of the reasons SAN performance can be impacted,” said Richard Briggs, Senior 
Technical Infrastructure Developer within Storage Management Services who was Technical 
Lead on the initial SAN implementation at HBOS which took place in 2000, and currently serves 
as Chairman of the Brocade UK User Group. “With the size and complexity of our SAN fabric, 
we often see problems that others have not seen before, so it is important that we have our 
own SAN performance monitoring and analysis solution in place to help diagnose hard to ﬁnd 
problem areas.” “One of the biggest challenges we face today is the perceived performance 
issues related to our SAN,” Close said. “Give us a hardware problem any day, because they are 
relatively simple to isolate, diagnose and ﬁx. It is the problems where a user tells us his or her 
‘application is slow.’ Other than checking the application itself, the possibilities are endless as to 
where the source of the problem might be.”

“None of the tools that we had been using to monitor our SAN’s performance could get us to 
the root of the problem, and some problems—in the early days—went unsolved,” admits Briggs. 
“With the monitoring and analysis tools bundled with each product, we weren’t able to dive 
deep enough into the problem area, so we used a ‘process of elimination’ method which we 
recognized was not an effective way to handle these issues.”

DETAILED VIEW OF NETWORK TRAFFIC
That’s when HBOS went looking for another SAN monitoring solution, and once it saw Virtual 
Instruments’ VirtualWisdom SAN I/O performance and analysis solution in action, the purchasing 
decision was not far behind. Virtual Instruments’ VirtualWisdom is a real-time monitoring solution 
that enables SAN managers to view critical data about their networks and increase performance 
and reliability. “VirtualWisdom allows us to turn our storage service around from being reactive to 
proactive,” said Close. “Whenever performance issues are encountered it is always the SAN that is 
highlighted as the problem by our customers. VirtualWisdom enables us to provide evidence to either 
support or refute the claim, which was not possible before. Furthermore, VirtualWisdom allows us 
to design more efﬁcient storage solutions,” Close said. “We have recently been able to demon-

strate that SAN response times are well within the thresholds that have been dictated and that the 
problem most likely was within the application itself,” Close added.  “Armed with that information, 
groups can evaluate their application design and redevelop or tune the application accordingly.”

Halifax Bank of Scotland  
CASE STUDY

3

“Everything used to be the SAN’s fault,” joked Briggs. “But now we have documented plenty 
of cases we have been able to identify a bad application or bad coding as the source of the 
problem, not the SAN. But wherever the problem lies, we are committed to ﬁnding it quickly 
and getting the problem resolved.” Briggs added that HBOS now initiates support calls to the 
appropriate vendor complete with a trace that details the issues to be dealt with. “It really helps 
jump-start the support process,” he said.

TRACKING PERFORMANCE LEVELS OVER TIME
According to Close, HBOS is starting to baseline the performance of its systems while they are 
in preproduction so the company can measure the performance of the system before it is de-
ployed into the production SAN. HBOS can then benchmark the system again once it is brought 
on line as well as six months later so the organization continually can monitor not only current 
overall performance, but also historical performance levels of individual SAN components. “By 
doing this, we are much better able to track performance over time, which often can give us a 
clue that a server, disk or switch might be starting to malfunction, but not enough to take down 
the system,” Close said. “By identifying these potential problem areas early in the process, we 
can proactively move to resolve a potential major problem before it occurs.”

According to Close, the VirtualWisdom solution goes a long way in helping us with HBOS’ storage 
capacity planning and load balancing as well. “Using our best practices, we want to design sys-
tems that are optimal and that will scale and be robust,” Close said. “We work to spread the load 
across storage ports and subsystems so we can optimize our performance in these areas.” “From 
the storage management perspective, VirtualWisdom allows SAN managers to isolate issues quickly 
and resolve them in a timely manner”

 “This enables us to spend more time tuning the SAN and less time ﬁghting ﬁres.” “We 
are striving to be the group of choice for storage solutions within HBOS,” concluded Close. “To 
accomplish this, we need to continually demonstrate the value and beneﬁts that we can provide. 
Virtual Instruments’ VirtualWisdom helps us quantify and measure the services we provide to the 
organization. VirtualWisdom is paying for itself multiple times every day as we are constantly being 
contacted about various issues that we can quickly identify and respond to in an intelligent man-
ner. It has been a powerful and vital addition to our SAN infrastructure.”

100 Enterprise Way, Suite C-3
Scotts Valley, CA 95066
Phone: 831-439-4000

Sales Information
sales@virtualinstruments.com
Phone: 831-439-4080

Customer Support
support@virtualinstruments.com
www.virtualinstruments.com

©2009 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and speciﬁcations are subject to change without notice.         

 

 

 

 

01/09

