 

CASE STUDY 

 

HOLY NAME MEDICAL CENTER 
SAFEGUARDS CRITICAL HEALTH-CARE 
APPLICATIONS WITH VBLOCK™ 
INFRASTRUCTURE PLATFORMS  

Executive Summary 

About Holy Name Medical Center 
Holy Name Medical Center in Teaneck, N.J., has provided the communities of northern New Jersey with 
compassionate medical and nursing care since 1925. Founded by the Sisters of Saint Joseph of Peace, Holy 
Name has evolved into a comprehensive 361-bed acute-care Medical Center with more than 900 physicians 
representing 35 medical specialties. 

Challenge 
  Medical Center expansion straining data center space 

  Inadequate disaster-recovery capabilities 

Solution 
  VblockTM

 Infrastructure Platforms 

Results 
  Accelerated delivery of critical applications supporting patient care 

  Hundreds of thousands of dollars of costs saved, targeted for potential emergency-room system upgrade 

  Reduced application recovery from days to under an hour 

  Driving expansion of private and public cloud strategy 

Challenge 
Following years of steady expansion, Holy Name faced the prospect of its data center running out of physical 
space and power and cooling resources. Holy Name’s lean staff could not deploy applications fast enough. And its 
existing tape-backup infrastructure was an inadequate disaster-recovery solution at best. 

With Vblock™ Infrastructure Platforms, Holy Name now has a factory-integrated, converged infrastructure that 
enables the Medical Center to grow without limits, all while ensuring 24/7 availability of medical and administrative 
services. 

“The old way of procuring and installing physical infrastructure was simply not compatible with the pace of a 
modern health-care facility like ours,” says Frank Marano, Systems Infrastructure Director at Holy Name Medical 
Center. “It could take weeks to roll out applications, which held us back from providing our physicians and nurses 
with the capabilities they needed to maximize patient care.” 

Solution 
Holy Name implemented Vblock Infrastructure Platforms from VCE. The Vblock platforms are comprised of Cisco 
Unified Computing System (UCS) blade servers, Cisco networking components, EMC VNX unified storage, and 
VMware vSphere virtualization. Using EMC RecoverPoint remote data protection and VMware vCenter Site 
Recovery Manager (SRM) solutions, Holy Name replicates the Vblock platforms between its production and 
disaster-recovery sites. 

© 2012 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. 

 

 

 

 

To optimize efficiency, Holy Name relies on Vblock platform technologies, including EMC Fully Automated 
Storage Tiering for Virtual Pools (FAST VP) and FAST Cache, as well as Flash, SAS, and near-line SAS drives 
comprising EMC VNX unified storage. For streamlined management, Holy Name uses VMware vCenter 
Operations Management Suite and EMC Unified Infrastructure Manager (UIM). 

“We looked at Dell’s Virtual Integrated System, but it didn’t have much of a track record,” says Marano. “We liked 
that Vblock platforms are fully tested and certified, and there have been many successful implementations in 
health care.” 

Computer Design and Integration (CDI), the reseller and systems integrator, and VCE Professional Services 
worked with Holy Name to deploy the Vblock platforms in just two weeks. 

Vblock platforms run a wide range of Holy Name’s critical clinical applications, including Oracle PeopleSoft and 
McKesson financial and material management solutions Four Rivers biomed and maintenance ticket system, 
HealthPay payment processor, McKesson IntelliShelf supply management software, Microsoft SQL Server, Lotus 
Notes, and Raiser’s Edge foundation software. Holy Name also plans to move its Xcelera cardiology PACS to the 
Vblock platforms. 

Results 

Accelerating server deployment from weeks to minutes 
Since implementing the Vblock platforms, Holy Name has been rolling out new applications dramatically faster 
with little burden on its IT staff. 

“In the past, it took two or three weeks just to get the hardware in, and then another couple of days to configure 
and deploy the application,” recalls Marano. “Now, using templates provided with the Vblock platform’s VMware 
vCenter software, we can deploy virtual servers in minutes and have new applications running in a day. We can 
meet almost any deadline to ensure we’re supporting the latest technologies and services.” 

Marano also values the automated storage tiering in Vblock platforms. “FAST will manage where VMs are stored 
based on workload and without requiring any hands-on work by our staff,” Marano comments. “We’re getting our 
users the best possible performance and making the most efficient use of our storage capacity.” 

Saving hundreds of thousands of dollars in capital expense 
With its 100 percent virtualized Vblock platform, Holy Name realized significant cost avoidance and expects 
ongoing operational saving. 

“We avoided spending hundreds of thousands of dollars for new UPS systems because the Vblock platforms pack 
so much more power in less space,” reports Marano. “We’re hoping not to have to purchase another physical 
server for years, which should save us a considerable amount..” 

“With a couple of racks already eliminated, we eventually expect to reduce the data center footprint by 50 percent. 
The room is already running cooler, and we’re definitely saving on power,” indicates Marano. 

Holy Name is also considering upgrading its emergency-room system. The health-care provider estimates saving 
$100,000 by virtualizing the new system with Vblock platforms should the project move forward. 

Reducing recovery time from days to under an hour 
Holy Name also improved availability and disaster recovery with Vblock platforms, avoiding disruptions to critical 
applications used to treat and care for patients. 

“Before, when systems went down, physicians and nurses had to just wait for the server to come back up,” notes 
Marano. “If the server was unrecoverable, then we’d have to restore everything from tape, which could take days. 
With RecoverPoint and SRM running on Vblock platforms, we can recover applications within an hour and not 
lose data.” 

© 2012 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

 

 

 

According to Marano, the ability to fail back is equally important. “There are a lot of solutions out there that fail over 
to a backup data center, but very few that can fail back to the primary without a big hassle. That’s really only 
possible with Vblock platform technologies, like SRM and RecoverPoint.” 

Maximizing virtualization to drive cloud expansion 
As Marano eyes the future, he looks to leveraging virtualization to the fullest. 

“We offer a public cloud service for bill paying,” he notes. “We’re also planning to virtualize everything possible as 
part of our private cloud strategy. And we’re considering desktop virtualization. 

“Vblock platforms are ideal for taking our cloud strategy in any direction that will help us enhance IT service and 
efficiency and, ultimately, improve the care of our patients.” 

About Holy Name Medical Center 
Holy Name Medical Center is a fully accredited, not-for-profit healthcare facility based in Teaneck, New Jersey, 
with off-site locations throughout Bergen County.  Founded and sponsored by the Sisters of St. Joseph of Peace 
in 1925, the comprehensive 361-bed medical center offers leading-edge medical practice and technology 
administered in an environment rooted in a tradition of compassion and respect for every patient. Holy Name 
provides high quality health care across a continuum that encompasses education, prevention, early intervention, 
comprehensive treatment options, rehabilitation and wellness maintenance—from pre-conception through end-of-
life.    

About CDI 
Computer Design and Integration LLC provides comprehensive and innovative technology infrastructure services 
that solve complex business challenges. Recognized since 2000 as one of the top 500 IT solution providers in the 
United States, CDI’s strategic differentiation is its commitment to understanding its clients’ business processes 
and helping them advance their corporate strategies using technology with a particular focus on highly available 
data center solutions. Founded in 1995, more than 80 percent of its 500 customers hail from the financial services, 
pharmaceutical, health care, and media and entertainment industries. What’s more, a vast majority of these 
customer relationships are ongoing. CDI clients have confirmed that the company’s quality, customer service, and 
ability to complete projects on time and on budget are what keep them coming back. 

ABOUT VCE 
VCE, the Virtual Computing Environment Company formed by Cisco and EMC with investments from 
VMware and Intel, accelerates the adoption of converged infrastructure and cloud-based computing models 
that dramatically reduce the cost of IT while improving time to market for our customers. VCE, through the 
Vblock platform, delivers the industry’s first completely integrated IT offering with end-to-end vendor 
accountability. VCE’s prepackaged solutions are available through an extensive partner network, and cover 
horizontal applications, vertical industry offerings, and application development environments, allowing 
customers to focus on business innovation instead of integrating, validating and managing IT infrastructure. 
For more information, go to www.vce.com. 
 
 

 
Copyright © 2012 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, 
LLC. and/or its affiliates in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. 

 

 

© 2012 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

 

 

 

