ManuF aCtuRing

	 Client

Hunter Fan Company, a 
global manufacturer of 
ceiling fans and air quality 
and control products

	 Challenge

Enable business growth with 
an agile infrastructure that 
enhances critical decision-
support applications 
affecting design, production 
and distribution 

	 Solution

Vblock Systems

	 ReSultS

Improve application 
performance and business 
continuity while shrinking 
data center footprint and 
simplifying support

www.vce.com

HUNTER FAN pREpARES FOR BUSINESS 

gROwTH wITH VBLOCK 

global	ManuF aCtuReR	iMpRoveS	peRFoRManCe	oF	deCiSion	SuppoRt
appliCationS	and	a CCeleRateS	Rollout	oF	viRtualized	deSktopS

	

Founded in 1886, Hunter Fan Company is the world’s premier designer and 
manufacturer of ceiling fans. The Memphis, Tenn.-based company also manufactures 
high-performance air purifiers, low-maintenance humidifiers, portable fans and 
energy-saving thermostats. 

Hunter Fan needed to position itself for an expected rebound of the U.S. housing 
market, which would spike demand for ceiling fans. Delivering new critical business 
applications in an open system environment elevated awareness that the company 
needed a stronger business continuity plan to ensure uninterrupted growth.

To support its business objectives, Hunter Fan consolidated its IT infrastructure 
on Vblock™ Systems, leading to increased performance and availability of critical 
business applications, enhanced agility and simplified administration.

the	Challenge
At the center of Hunter’s growth strategy was its business intelligence systems. 
while the company needed more capacity to run decision support applications, 
its infrastructure was running out of space and processing power. In addition,  
if a disaster occurred, critical business systems would be vulnerable and could 
be down for up to three weeks, crippling Hunter Fan’s business. 

“The VCE Support model 
has greatly exceeded our 
expectations. Having a single 
line of support to handle 
all three aspects of our 
infrastructure is tremendous, 
saving countless hours we 
can now spend on activities 
to help the business grow. 
we were thoroughly 
impressed with the attention 
and follow-up we have 
received from the VCE team. 
With	vCe	as	our	partner,	we	
are	confident	they	will	meet	
our	needs	as	our	business	
continues	to	evolve.”  
— Rick Brandl, IT Director 
Hunter Fan Company

IT was unable to respond to new 
business requirements with the 
existing infrastructure in a timely 
manner. Deploying additional capacity 
typically consumed a full day and the 
company’s IT staff spent significant time 
troubleshooting issues. The company  
was virtualizing desktops but here again, 
the infrastructure was inadequate. 

the	Solution
After evaluating offerings from NetApp 
and VCE, Hunter Fan chose to standardize 
on Vblock Systems. VCE’s factory-
integration, management tools, and single 
point of contact for infrastructure support 
simplify operations and frees IT resources 
for more strategic tasks.

VCE performed a pre-implementation site 
visit to ensure that Hunter Fan’s facilities 
were prepared for the Vblock System. 
VCE professional Services, along with 
partner proTech, deployed the Vblock 
System in less than one week and provided 
knowledge transfer to the IT staff.

Now, Hunter Fan runs its business-critical 
applications in a private cloud enabled by 
the Vblock System 300. The system hosts 
Oracle Demantra demand management 
and forecasting, IBM Cognos Business 
Intelligence, Microsoft SQL Server and 
Attunity data integration. Hunter Fan 
rolled out Citrix XenDesktop and XenApp 
for desktop virtualization. The company 
utilized VMware for server virtualization 
and has migrated approximately 85 
percent of its server infrastructure, with 
plans to reach 100 percent virtualization 
by year’s end.

For business continuity, Hunter Fan 
deployed a second system that provides 
failover capabilities for the company’s 
production data center. 

the	Results
with Vblock Systems, Hunter Fan has 
built the infrastructure it needs to 
support the business. Making use of 
Vblock FAST Cache and solid state tier 1 
storage, the organization has been able 
to accelerate its desktop virtualization 
plans. provisioning times have been cut in 
half. And IT is configuring a new failover 
solution built on Vblock Data protection 
products. with Vblock Systems, IT has 
gained a more robust, agile infrastructure 
to enable business growth: 

•  Approximately 40 percent performance 

improvement enables faster access to 
business intelligence data and quicker 
forecasting and decision-making relating 
to product design, manufacturing 
production levels, distribution channels 
and capital investments

•  Data analysis completed in one-third 

the time, providing results to business 
analysts long before the work day begins

•  Rollout of desktop virtualization to  

be accelerated from 20 to 80 percent 
within six months

•  Increased storage capacity from 10  
to 70 terabytes while reducing data 
center footprint 

•  Accelerated time to market for new 

virtual machines, from a full day to just 
four hours due to integrated Vblock 
System management tools

•  Single point of contact for support 
reduced time troubleshooting with 
multiple vendors, freeing IT staff to 
focus on more strategic projects

Hunter Fan relies on VCE as a key 
business partner to ensure high 
performance, scalability and availability 
that meet the company’s evolving 
business needs. with VCE and Vblock 
Systems, Hunter Fan is well positioned to 
handle ongoing growth at headquarters 
and around the world.

 
Copyright © 2012 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, LLC. and/or its  
affiliates in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

www.vce.com

the	WoRld’S	Mo St	advanCed	ConveRged	inFRaStRuCtuRe

