OIL INDUSTR y

  CLIENT

Iqon

  CHALLENGE

Deploying SAP, while  
cutting costs and improving 
IT quality

  SOLUTION

3 Vblock Systems– one for 
each company data center

  RESULTS

Iqon achieved a 64% 
internal rate of return, while 
improving IT metrics across 
the board, benefitting its 
business and its customers 
in one stroke. 

www.vce.com

VBlOCk SySTEMS ENABlE 

OPERATIONAl ExCEllENCE AND THE  

BIRTH OF A NEW BuSINESS  

ExECUTIVE SUMMAR y 

After a successful acquisition and growth phase, Rompetrol turned its energy  
into improving global operations by consolidating IT operations and launching a 
series of IT initiatives including an SAP rollout and a move toward private cloud. 
Realizing that its rigid IT infrastructure was not only expensive to operate but also 
inadequate for its expanded operations, Rompetrol evaluated options for a virtual 
infrastructure. Rompetrol chose VCE and Vblock™ Systems for its production and 
disaster recovery operations and distributed them in three of its data centers. In the 
process, Rompetrol created a new organization, Iqon Romania, that consolidated  
the IT expertise spread across the company and was given the mandate to provide  
“IT-as-a-service” to Rompetrol. 

In just 12 months, Iqon/Rompetrol consolidated 675 physical servers 
to 63 servers running 480 virtual machines (VMs). The consolidation, 
which included the first phase of Rompetrol’s SAP project, enabled faster 
application provisioning, improved service levels, and increased IT asset 
utilization. On the cost side, the switch to Vblock Systems yielded a 
64% internal rate of return (IRR), providing significant savings in energy 
consumption, power and cooling, and maintenance.

It soon became clear that operational 
excellence could not be achieved so 
long as IT had to manage 675 servers, 
14+ storage solutions, and hundreds 
of specialized applications. Existing 
systems had to be virtualized and 
consolidated so that IT could empower 
the business while, at the same time, 
improving operating metrics and 
significantly reducing costs. 

To increase the speed of business, IT 
needed to be delivered as a service 
providing resources on demand with 
the right SlAs. Rompetrol decided to 
bring together all its IT resources under 
one group, and outsource its IT needs 
to this new organization, which would 
later become Iqon Romania.

Implementing SAP
The first challenge of the new 
organization was the implementation of 
an SAP solution, which would centralize 
Rompetrol’s management systems and 
drive its enterprise resource planning 
processes. After developing a detailed 
RFP and evaluating multiple options, 
experts at Iqon and its partner system 
integrator CRESCENDO, determined 
that the Vblock System would provide 
the high availability needed to run SAP 
and the highest value to the business. 
In addition, Iqon saw that the platform 
would have enough capacity to allow 
Rompetrol to consolidate hundreds 
of server and tens of storage systems, 
enabling operations to be streamlined 
and costs to be cut. 

From the start, Iqon was impressed 
with the system’s power. Cristian 
Balulescu, Director of Operational 
Management Solutions and Services 
for Iqon, felt the “Vblock Systems offer 
better performance, new technology, 
and unified fabric. The product, in my 
opinion, doesn’t have competition in 
terms of its capabilities.” 

Solution

Iqon Romania/Rompetrol purchased 
3 Vblock Systems and deployed one 
at each of its 3 data centers. One was 
a production unit; one was used for 
disaster recovery; and one was used to 
support Rompetrol branch operations 
(700 stations in Romania and 700 
across Europe). 

With Vblock Systems, the company 
has been able to accelerate one of 
Romania’s largest ERP deployments 
to date. “The solution supports the 
activity of all divisions of the Rompetrol 
group, so the implementation roadmap 
was very strict. Consolidating the IT 
infrastructure on Vblock Systems helped 
us reach the aggregate objectives of 
the first phase,” says Giani kacic, SAP 
Project Director Rompetrol.

The high-density Vblock Systems 
reduced the IT footprint and provided 
more computing resources, while 
delivering on stringent SlAs. This 
combined with the Vblock System’s ease 
of operations permitted Rompetrol to 
realize significant cost savings.

Situation
The Netherlands’ based multi-billion 
dollar oil conglomerate, Rompetrol, 
had acquired several companies in 
a move to grow revenue and profit. 
The acquisitions, each with their own 
internal business structures had left the 
company with an increasingly complex 
IT infrastructure that could not keep 
pace with the business. 

While two internal IT organizations 
managed the company’s IT resources, 
it was common for newly acquired 
entities and existing business units 
to handle elements of their own IT 
as well. Additionally, each IT driven 
business initiative tended to come 
with its own hardware. This led to a 
proliferation of systems and equipment, 
which was difficult and expensive 
to manage. unplanned downtime 
was frequent. IT for new projects 
would take considerable time to be 
provisioned and computing resources 
were poorly utilized (2-3% average 
CPu utilization for servers, and 20% 
average storage utilization). To keep 
growing, while meeting operational and 
financial targets, Rompetrol needed to 
modernize its IT systems and transform 
its operations. 

“Vblock makes infrastructure 
simple. When you manage 
infrastructure, you have 
to consider a lot of things, 
like support, provisioning, 
administration of the 
operating systems. If you run 
a heterogeneous environment 
this is a real headache.”  
— Cristian Balulescu, Director 
of Operational Management 
Solutions and Services for Iqon

www.vce.com

Results

With Vblock Systems, Iqon was able 
to attain significant improvements: 
physical servers were reduced by 
90%; the number of people needed 
to manage the environment shrunk 
from 14 to 5, and availability climbed 
markedly from 93.7% to 99.8%. In all, 
Iqon realized savings of $3.6 million 
a year. The infrastructure operating 
burden was reduced by more than two 
thirds, thus freeing resources to tackle 
business critical challenges. 

Summing up his experience with the 
systems, Askor Zhakenov, a Group 
IT Director at Rompetrol says, “The 
Vblock Systems’ major advantage can 
be expressed in four simple words: best 
value for money.” George Oprescu, 
the General Manager of Iqon, has seen 
the financial benefit as well, and he 
recognizes how the Vblock System has 
let him elevate the level of his business: 
“By going with Vblock Systems, we 
finally managed to reverse the ratio of 
resources spent on administration and 
the development of new opportunities. 
Moreover, it is the first step towards a 
greater level of transparency everyone 
is craving. The Vblock System is the 
best example of how technology 
can enable IT to better help business 
people, while decreasing the budget.” 

The Vblock System has also shown its 
mettle with impressive improvement 
on a number of operational metrics. 
For instance, the number of downtime 
incidents per month has decreased 
from 3 to .05. The improved uptime 
directly increases the quality of the 
services provided. Iqon can now offer 
enterprise grade infrastructure for the 
virtualization of tier one applications. 

Iqon was able to meet and exceed 
Rompetrol’s virtualization targets. Iqon 
virtualized 88% of Rompetrol’s servers, 
enabling it to reduce the number of 
physical servers from 675 to 63. This 
in turn has resulted in power and 
space savings. The infrastructure now 
handles most of Rompetrol’s business 
applications, 6 out of 8 of their major 
tier one workloads (the remaining 2  
will soon be retired), and 230 of its  
250 other workloads. 

88%

0%

2010

2011

2012

Infrastructure Savings (Millions USD Per year)

Support Contracts for legacy Hardware

Infrastructure Monitoring Software

People Moved To Different Tasks

Support for High Availability Components

Hosting + Power + HVAC

Total Savings Per year

$ 1.38

$ 0.77

$ 0.64

$ 0.38

$ 0.38

$ 3.56

Iqon IT — Before and After Vblock

2010

2012

Virtualization status: 0%

Virtualization status: 88%

Datacenter space: 45 racks

Datacenter space: 23 racks

-0 kW annual Power Savings

-240 kW annual Power Savings

CPu usage: 2.76%

CPU usage: 24%

RAM usage: 53%

RAM usage: 90%

Physical Servers: 675

Physical Servers: 63

Availability Ratio (%): 93.7%

Availability Ratio (%): 99.8%

The pre-integrated, standardized nature 
of the Vblock Systems dramatically 
simplifies IT. As Mr. Balulescu describes, 
“When you manage infrastructure, you 
have to consider a lot of things, like 
support, provisioning, and administration 
of the operating systems. If you run a 
heterogeneous environment, this is a real 
headache. The Vblock System is much, 
much simpler to manage.” Provisioning is 
much faster now too, with new capacity 
provisioned in hours, whereas before it 
could take a month and a half. This has 
greatly increased the speed at which  
Iqon can respond to new requests from 
the business.  

The tremendous ease of management the 
Vblock System provides has enabled the 
company to reduce admin support from 
14 FTE’s to 5, freeing 9 people to work on 
new projects to drive additional business 
value for customers. Mr. Balulescu 
explains, “Now more than 50% of my time 
is spent on new projects. Before 70% was 
spent on administrative projects.” This 
benefits the business and “it makes for a 
more enjoyable work environment.” 

Next Steps
The capabilities and responsiveness that 
Vblock Systems provided helped the 
new group to go beyond their original 
mandate to serve Rompetrol. With the 
expertise of over 100 IT professional, 
the technology differentiation afforded 
by Vblock systems, and a major oil 
conglomerate as its main customer, 
the group became Iqon Romania, an 
independent company. It evolved its 
business model to provide IT as a service 
to other companies across Europe.  

According to Mr. Balulescu, “One of the 
key benefits for me is knowing exactly 
what I have in my court. It used to always 
be a surprise. Now, I have one machine 
and everything is on it. If I exceed 
capacity, I can buy more. So, it makes my 
infrastructure management very easy.” 
He knows that if additional capacity is 
needed, VCE can respond quickly with 
additional Vblock Systems delivered in 
under 45 days and operational just hours 
after delivery. In contrast to systems from 
other vendors, which can take months for 
delivery and weeks to  
become operational. 

The Vblock System experience has been 
a very positive one for Iqon. Mr. Balulescu 
finishes, “I would recommend the Vblock 
System. The most impressive behavior is 
from the team. They are very enthusiastic 
to be working with it.”

For More Information visit www.vce.com 
or contact your authorized VCE reseller. 

To learn about Iqon, please go to:  
www.iqon.com

“As far as I am concerned, 
the advantage offered by 
the Vblock platform can be 
expressed in just four words: 
best value for money.”  
— Askar Zhakenov, CIO, 
Rompetrol

 
Copyright © 2013 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. VCE, VCE Vision and Vblock are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company LLC or its  
affiliates in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

www.vce.com

THE WORLD’S MOST ADVANCED CONVERGED INFRASTRUCTURE

