HEALTHCARE CASE STUDY 

 

Virtual Instruments helps JPS Health 
Network reduce infrastructure costs  

 

 

Challenges:  

•  Maintain service levels, 
while controlling costs 
Improve effectiveness of 
existing IT staff, while 
growing data 50% / year 

• 

•  Help prepare IT 

department for bringing 
more mission critical 
applications on-line 

Solution:  

 

•  Began deploying Virtual 

Instruments VirtualWisdom 
and professional services 
consulting in Fall, 2008 

Customer Benefits:  

Company Overview  
In October 1877, future Fort Worth, Texas mayor John Peter Smith deeded five acres of land 
at what is now 1500 South Main Street to provide a place where individuals from Fort Worth 
and Tarrant County "could have the best of medical care."  In 1906, a hospital affiliated with 
the Fort Worth Medical College was opened in Fort Worth, and the foundation for JPS 
Health Network was laid.  Today, JPS Health Network continues to serve the needs of the 
families in Tarrant County, working to improve individual health and access to high-quality 
health care. The facilities have grown to include a 567-bed hospital that is attached to a 
Patient Care Pavilion – a five-story acute care facility, along with an outpatient care center 
and a dedicated facility for psychiatric services. 

IT Environment and Role 
JPS Health Network’s Tarrant County main datacenter has a 200+ terabyte SAN growing at 
over 40% annually connected to application servers through a Brocade fabric supporting 
300 fibre channel SAN ports.  To optimize budget and resources, JPS uses both VMware 
server virtualization and storage virtualization.  Storage is provided by an HDS USP/V 
storage system, with two modular systems virtualized behind it and another standalone 
modular array.  There are now 3 full-time staff managing all storage and backup related 
tasks for the entire JPS organization, supporting all office functions like email and billing, 
and the ongoing migration to online patient records. 

Challenges and Concerns 
One of the key challenges was in maintaining traditional high service levels in the face of 
40% annual data growth, while keeping costs down.  With a growing number of ports and 
disks, lack of standardization amongst vendor-supplied tools, and an inability to do 
predictive problem avoidance, it was becoming a challenge to manage the SAN. 

With an increasingly digitized patient-facing environment, Christopher Carlton, Storage 
Team Lead at JPS states matter-of-factly that JPS IT systems “can’t really be down at all”.  

Solution Evaluation  
Like many IT shops, JPS was challenged with tight budgets and with getting more 

•  Discovery of SAN related 

problems before they could 
cause outages 
Increased productivity of 
existing staff 

• 

•  Provides quicker 

responses from storage 
vendors by providing 
insightful VirtualWisdom 
reports 

“To-date, we’ve used 

VirtualWisdom to find and 

resolve four problems before 
they would have eventually 
caused an outage.  We’re 
using it as an additional 

person on our team.  Once 
you have it, you see a big 

value.” 
Christopher Carlton 
Storage Team Lead 

 
 
 

  

 
 
 
 
 

HTTP://VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

HEALTHCARE CASE STUDY 

 

performance from existing resources.  To do this, IT knew it must be proactive; it had to 
avoid problems and anticipate issues before users and application owners were affected.  
The only way to do this without dramatically increasing the staff size was to find some way 
to proactively automate the monitoring and analysis of the effect of the SAN on application 
availability.   According to Christopher Carlton, “All the storage vendors will help you to fix 
problems, if you can identify the problem, and that’s the trick.”  JPS wanted: 

•  A predictive analysis tool, something that could act like their “eyes and ears” to alert to 

issues before they become serious problems.  Something to help prevent outages. 
•  A reporting mechanism that could take a deeper look than vendor-supplied tools, 

something at the hardware level to find things that might cause application problems.  
With a light staff, JPS couldn’t spend time watching every SAN component. 

•  Centralized monitoring, to accommodate a move from a primary only to a primary + 

backup site 

•  An agnostic, vendor-neutral solution that would enable them to avoid finger pointing and 

assist the vendors to offer better advice 

•  A partner relationship with a flexible business model 
•  A complementary solution to existing vendor-oriented monitoring solutions.  (JPS uses 
storage-vendor specific tools like Brocade DCFM and HDS Tuning Manager to manage 
their storage assets (dynamic provisioning, capacity utilization, etc).  

Benefits of the Virtual Instruments VirtualWisdom Solution 
Previous to the VirtualWisdom deployment, JPS would have to wait until a problem was 
reported, perhaps even in the form of an outage.  In a typical scenario, they would look at 
individual components, system logs, etc. and do “process of elimination” troubleshooting.  
With VirtualWisdom, problems were identified much earlier, before they became serious, and 
root cause analysis became more efficient.  For instance, with VirtualWisdom, a problem the 
server team thought was a SCSI controller related turned out to be an HBA issue, saving 
potentially days of wasted investigative work. 

Why use VI 
Specific Virtual Instruments benefits to JPS Health Network include: 
• 
•  Saves CAPEX by enabling a better understanding of true bottlenecks and potentially 

Finds problems before they affect application performance or availability 

reducing the need to add hardware 

•  Helps in communicating with our server team and our storage vendors.  JPS can send 

them VirtualWisdom reports and ask for their advice.  

•  No impact on users of application; a non-intrusive solution 
•  Helps validate tiering strategies – need a neutral third-party in order to validate tiering, to 

help match application requirements with the total SAN infrastructure; helps eliminate 
“rules of thumb” planning 

•  Great value-add from the VI staff.  During the first week of VI training and 

implementation, some of the staff learned more about storage than they’d learned in the 
past 3 years 

 

“I think every person in the 
world should buy TAPs.  It’s 
like the valve for checking tire 

pressure on your car. “ 

Christopher Carlton 
Storage Team Lead 

“The UI is very nice; not 

complicated at all.  With the 
dashboard, you see things in 
real time that you wouldn’t 

otherwise know about” 

Christopher Carlton 
Storage Team Lead 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

“I believe that we’ve saved 
nearly $100,000 per storage 

array by understanding 

performance bottlenecks better 

and not having to buy extra 
cache on the HDS arrays.” 

Christopher Carlton 
Storage Team Lead 

 
 
 
 

 

 
25 Metro Drive, Suite 400  
San Jose, CA 95110  
 
Sales Information  
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
 
Customer Support  
support@virtualinstruments.com  
www.virtualinstruments.com 
 
©2010 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. 
Features and specifications are subject to 
change without notice 01/10 
 

 

HTTP://VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

