VBLOCK AT THE HEART OF  

VIRTUALIZED JD EDWARDS ROLLOUT  

AT LAFARGE AMERICAS 

adapting	to	BuSineSS	FluCtuationS	with	a	l oweR-Co St	data	 	
CenteR	StRategy

Because the building materials industry is especially sensitive to both global 
and local economic conditions, the ability to adjust cost in response to regional 
opportunity offers a competitive advantage. However, traditional data center models—
overburdened with fixed costs—have not supported needed levels of business agility.

Lafarge, a global leader in building materials, devised an IT initiative to change that. To 
build a more agile cost structure, Lafarge required a new architecture—one that would 
enable it to spin down data center output and expenses during economic slowdowns 
and allocate IT resources to the fastest-growing markets and segments.

With the Americas as the launching pad for its innovative data center strategy, Lafarge 
has developed a new ERP template—built on Oracle’s JD Edwards EnterpriseOne—and 
migrated it to a virtual environment running on Vblock™ Systems.

ConS tRuCtion

	 Client

Lafarge, multi-national 
building materials company

	 Challenge

Implement a data center 
strategy that enables 
Lafarge to effectively 
respond to changing market 
conditions and demands 

	 Solution

Vblock Systems running 
Oracle’s JD Edwards suite of 
enterprise resource planning 
(ERP) software

	 ReSultS

Is dramatically reducing 
space requirements and 
power costs while providing 
improved business agility

www.vce.com

“our	analysis	points	to	a	
72.5%	reduction	in	data	
center	floor	space and a 
54.8% reduction in power 
consumption for the Lafarge 
IT environment in the 
Americas. That savings will 
allow us to implement our 
‘metro-cluster’ data center 
strategy while remaining 
cost neutral in our IT 
operating budget.” 
— Brent Wolfram Director, 
Technology and Security 
Architecture Lafarge 
Americas

the	Results
Lafarge Americas’ move away from  
HP’s legacy Itanium-based hardware to 
Vblock Systems is producing a number  
of benefits for the region:

•  Data center floor space will be reduced 
by a projected 72.5% when the rollout  
is complete.

•  Power consumption will decline by  

a projected 54.8%.

•  Lafarge’s metro-cluster data center 
strategy will be implemented with  
no increase in the Americas’ IT 
operating budget. 

•  The region’s data center capacity can 

be quickly and efficiently adjusted 
as needed, while making better use 
of deployed capacity through higher 
consolidation ratios.

•  Performance of Oracle’s JD Edwards 

solution and other applications has 
been improved by leveraging specific 
compute, network, storage, and 
virtualization technologies that are 
integrated into Vblock Systems.

•  IT planning can be done much further 
in advance now that the region deals 
with only one vendor as opposed to 
juggling the roadmaps for five or six 
vendors as in the past.

“This is the first step in an ongoing 
process, and it’s going to be a while 
before we have converted all operations 
and can realize the full ROI,” said 
Brent Wolfram, Director, Technology 
and Security Architecture for Lafarge 
Americas. “But we’re already much more 
nimble and agile, and our IT costs are 
going to continue to come down.”

the	Challenge	
Headquartered in Paris, France, Lafarge 
has approximately 68,000 employees  
in more than 60 countries generating 
annual sales of 15.2 billion euros. For 
many years, the company sought an 
efficient way to adjust the capacity of 
traditional “big-iron” data centers to 
match business requirements. 

Lafarge’s experience with virtualization 
demonstrated the gains they could 
achieve. However, in order to move the 
ERP system—the heart of the business—
to a virtual environment, the company 
needed a reliable infrastructure from a 
vendor it could trust. In Vblock Systems, 
Lafarge found the levels of availability 
and flexibility it requires. 

the	Solution
One of the largest multi-national users 
of Oracle’s JD Edwards EnterpriseOne 
solution, Lafarge has taken the lead 
in optimizing the software to run in 
a virtualized environment on Vblock 
Systems. In addition, the company relies 
on its Vblock system to run IBM Cognos 
for business intelligence. 

Lafarge is rolling out its innovative data 
center strategy first in the Americas 
region, which accounts for 27% of its 
global sales. The Vblock Systems strategy 
enables the company to nimbly respond 
to changes in business conditions while 
making the most of regional IT resources.

The new approach also abandons the 
traditional, warm-site, disaster recovery 
(DR) model in favor of a “metro-cluster” 
strategy that allows the company to use 
its DR resources for development, quality 
assurance, and other needs. The company 
will federate its original data center with a 
second center planned in close proximity 
to the first—operating the Vblock Systems 
as a high-availability pair rather than as 
a production system and active standby. 
This will improve resource utilization and 
allow IT to migrate workloads “on the fly” 
between data centers.

 
Copyright © 2012 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, LLC. and/or its  
affiliates in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

www.vce.com

the	woRld’S	Mo St	adVanCed	ConVeRged	inFRa StRuCtuRe

