 

CASE STUDY 

 

COLLEGE BOARD LIFTS EFFICIENCY 
AND READIES FOR PRIVATE CLOUD 
SERVICES WITH VBLOCK™ 
INFRASTRUCTURE PLATFORMS 

Executive Summary 

About the Mississippi Community College Board  
The Mississippi Community College Board (MCCB) is the coordinating organization for Mississippi’s 15 
community and junior colleges. The board coordinates and distributes funds throughout the community colleges, 
which serve more than 88,000 students. MCCB’s Technology Division coordinates, plans, and manages a variety 
of information technologies used by each of the colleges to support educational, operational, and administrative 
functions. 

Challenge 
  Data center running out of space 

  Power, cooling, and support costs increasing 

Solution  
  VblockTM Infrastructure Platforms 

Results 
  Decreased data center footprint by 40 percent 

  Reduced management time by 60 to 70 percent 

  Achieved 97 percent server virtualization 

  Improved IT agility and reduction of provisioning time of new services  

Challenge 
The Mississippi Community College Board (MCCB) wanted to leverage server virtualization, but its aging physical 
infrastructure was slowing adoption. Rather than update infrastructure elements sequentially, MCCB was able to 
fast-forward its enterprise-wide upgrade and virtualization strategy with Vblock Infrastructure Platforms. 

Ray Smith, MCCB’s Technology Division’s assistant executive director for technology, explains, “We wrestled with 
all the bad things that come with equipment nearing end of life. We were running out of data center space, and our 
power and cooling costs and support expenditures were growing. Initially, we wanted to move to HP blades, but 
our IT partner, Venture Technologies, told us about the Vblock platform. We saw that the Vblock solution would 
resolve our issues, simplify our operations, and let us deliver new services.”  

In addition, MCCB needed an infrastructure that would enable it to participate in the Statewide Longitudinal Data 
System (SLDS), a national program that enables tracking of student information from early education to the 
workforce.  

Solution 
At MCCB’s data center in Jackson, Miss., where business-critical applications are hosted, a Vblock platform 
replaced three HP servers and EqualLogic storage. The Vblock platform includes Cisco Unified Computing 
System (UCS) blade servers, Cisco Nexus switches, EMC unified storage, EMC Ionix Unified Infrastructure 
Manager (UIM) software, and VMware vSphere virtualization. 

© 2011 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. 

 

 

 

 

Converged, fully tested, and supported by VCE, the Virtual Computing Environment Company, MCCB’s Vblock 
platform hosts all of MCCB’s applications including online registration, Mississippi Virtual Community College, 
Microsoft Exchange, SharePoint and SQL Server, as well as DNS servers for the colleges.  

MCCB engaged professional services from VCE and Venture Technologies for the implementation. Venture 
Technologies used its experience with the Vblock platform to provide services that included migrating MCCB’s 
existing VMware servers to the new architecture. 

“VCE and Venture are a great team,” notes Smith. “Both companies have top-class engineers and are committed 
to working with us as trusted partners.” 

Results 

Smaller Footprint from Day One 
The plan called for VCE and Venture Technologies to spend five days at MCCB’s data center implementing the 
Vblock platform. The on-site work took only three days, which pleased Smith.  

“We were able to empty two racks of file servers on day one. The simpler physical setup also works to our 
advantage because we streamlined all the different power supplies, cooling fans, and cabling behind our racks,” 
states Smith.  

Using the Vblock platform has since let MCCB consolidate its server equipment racks down from three to one, so 
the hardware occupies 40 percent less space in the data center.   

Efficient Support Model Saves Time and Money 
“With VCE and the Vblock platform, we’re not dealing with multiple vendors. It’s a different model that translates 
into saving time and money. We call one number for answers to a variety of things without finger-pointing,” Smith 
observes.   

When it comes to managing computing, storage, and network resources, the Vblock platform lets MCCB manage 
everything from a single console. Smith estimates the division’s three-member IT team regained 60 to 70 percent 
of the time spent managing their older systems.  

“The beauty of the Vblock platform is that we’re managing everything from one point and much more easily than I 
ever imagined. Before, we were often blind to issues that were brewing in our environment,” Smith remarks.  

“Since we’ve had the Vblock platform, I haven’t had to spend any time in the data center looking for red lights on 
my disk drives or checking whether everything is plugged in. I even put in a new network management appliance 
the other day, and it linked to my wide area network and didn’t have to fish through cables,” he adds. 

Predictable Performance for Mission-Critical Applications 
Having virtualized 97 percent of MCCB’s centrally hosted applications, the Technology Division maintains high 
service levels for tens of thousands of users in the state’s community and junior colleges. 

“The Vblock platform lets us easily give critical workloads the horsepower to get the response times we need,” 
says Smith. “If a counselor or student is registering for an online class, or checking for open seats in a class, 
performance is critical because courses are filled on a first-come, first-serve basis. Our database lookups now get 
subsecond responses. I’m seeing smiles instead of hearing complaints.” 

Along with the performance, MCCB’s distance-learning applications require 24x7 availability. “Our virtual 
community college makes it just as important for our system to be up on Saturday night at 2 a.m. as during regular 
business hours,” Smith comments. “The Vblock platform keeps us running without downtime, if we have a 
hardware failure. It has virtual server replication, and the servers and switches are redundant, so we can go on 
with our mission.” 

Predictable performance also enabled MCCB to virtualize key databases with confidence, including enrollment, 
adult basic education, audit and athletic databases, which are accessed by its customers on a 24x7 basis. 

© 2011 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

 

 

 

Primed for Private Cloud 
Next, MCCB expects to use the Vblock platform to enable private cloud services for the community and junior 
colleges.  

Smith notes, “The Vblock platform gave us the headroom to offer up services we didn’t have before. We’re looking 
at things with the colleges, like disaster recovery and virtual server provisioning.” 

Having the Vblock platform also removes anxieties about the future. “We can grow to whatever capacity we need, 
without the expense of changing everything out and starting over. With the way the Vblock platform is engineered, 
our window is bigger than the normal three-year technology life cycle. It’s great not to be locked into something 
inflexible where the technology is outdated before you get the benefits,” states Smith.  

For More Information 
www.vce.com 

ABOUT VENTURE TECHNOLOGIES 
Venture Technologies is an IT solutions company founded in 1986 that provides Premise Solutions, Collaboration 
Solutions, and VTCloud Services. Venture serves private and public sector clients across the Southeast with 
locations in Alabama, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Tennessee. The company also owns and operates a 
SAS 70 Type II Certified Data Center in Jackson, Miss., from which it provides Cloud Services across the U.S. 
and internationally. For more information, visit www.ventech.com. 

 

ABOUT VCE 
VCE, the Virtual Computing Environment Company formed by Cisco and EMC with investments from 
VMware and Intel, accelerates the adoption of converged infrastructure and cloud-based computing models 
that dramatically reduce the cost of IT while improving time to market for our customers. VCE, through the 
Vblock platform, delivers the industry's first completely integrated IT offering with end-to-end vendor 
accountability. VCE's prepackaged solutions are available through an extensive partner network, and cover 
horizontal applications, vertical industry offerings, and application development environments, allowing 
customers to focus on business innovation instead of integrating, validating and managing IT infrastructure. 
For more information, go to www.vce.com. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
Copyright © 2011 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, 
LLC. and/or its affiliates in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. 

 

© 2011 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved.  

 

 

 

 

