 

 

 
Healthcare Services Company Deploys Virtual 
Instruments’ NetWisdom SAN Optimization Platform to 
Improve Customer Service 
Overview and IT Contribution 

 

This leading healthcare services company has been in business for more than 100 years.  
As one of the largest healthcare services company, they combine innovation, 
technology and process knowledge, strong relationships and a business approach to 
give customers and partners the power to succeed.  

Their vision is to help create a healthcare system where quality is higher, mistakes are 
fewer and costs are lower. They provide pharmaceuticals, medical supplies and 
healthcare information technologies that make healthcare safer while reducing costs. 
And they touch virtually every aspect of healthcare. For instance, they distribute a huge 
proportion of the medicines used in North America, supplying thousands of North 
American health care locations.  

IT Environment 

The IT department is more than just a supporting function; it is a core contributor to the 
value of the company.  For instance, they help prevent thousands of medication errors 
every week through automation and bar-code scanning technology that helps to ensure 
the right patient gets the right drug at the right time.  

The two primary datacenters span the continent, with a Cisco fabric in the east and 
Brocade in west.  Together, the sites support a mix of UNIX, LINUX, and Windows 
servers, approximately 500 of which are SAN attached through over 5,000 ports.  The 
eastern site supports a separate fabric for managed services, which supports a wide 
range of customers including pharmacies and hospitals.  Storage is primarily supplied by 
EMC. 

 

 

HEALTH CARE 
CASE STUDY 

Challenges:  

•  Maintain a position as a pre-
eminent health care services 
company 

• 

• 

Prevent observed 
performance problems  

Drive costs out of IT 
infrastructure 

Solution:  

• 

Virtual Instruments 
NetWisdom ProbeV software 

Customer Benefits:  

Proactive problem resolution 
keeps the SAN architecture 
optimized and eliminates 
major problems from 
affecting business operations, 
helping to keep costs down 

The ability to design optimal 
SAN storage that can be easily 
scaled over time  

• 

• 

 

 

 

 
 

“Since we have implemented 
NetWisdom to monitor our 

SAN we have gained 

tremendous visibility into 
our infrastructure that was 
not available previously” 

-Senior SAN Administrator 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

 

 

Consistent with the business goals of controlling costs, the IT department is charged 
with finding significant savings in infrastructure.  Already, they have seen significant 
savings through consolidation and through improved server utilization by virtualizing 
with VMware.  Going forward, additional savings are expected through better use of 
tier 2 and 3 storage, and automating server and storage provisioning. 

 
 
 
 
 

HEALTH CARE 
CASE STUDY 

NetWisdom Value 

According to the company, “Since we have implemented NetWisdom to monitor our 
SAN, we have gained tremendous visibility into our infrastructure that was not available 
previously.  We are using the product to monitor our Inter-Switch Links which we could 
not do up until that time.  Now we can identify exactly where SAN congestion is 
occurring – at the hosts on the edge, on storage arrays on the core, or on the ISLs 
between the core and edge.  This has definitely enhanced the accuracy of our root 
cause analysis when congestion occurs.”  If traffic exceeds a pre-defined threshold, 
NetWisdom sends SNMP alerts to the Tivoli Enterprise Console.  The deployment 
team’s success is measured by SLAs, and many of the applications are directly 
customer-facing so fast turnaround on problem resolution is key.   

They go on to state “We can now empirically demonstrate when ISLs are getting 
saturated and add more links as necessary without guesswork.  Another thing that has 
impressed us with the product is that as we grow our SAN infrastructure by adding 
switches to the fabrics, NetWisdom is automatically identifying the new ISLs and 
monitoring them without direct administrator intervention.”   

VirtualWisdom Value 

To lower the cost of its IT infrastructure and to continue to drive down the costs of 
delivering healthcare services, they are starting to deploy server virtualization using 
VMware.  As the rollout of VMware accelerates, they are investigating Virtual 
Instruments’ VirtualWisdom to optimize the performance and utilization of their 
virtualized infrastructure.  Today, IT can only isolate SAN traffic to a specific ESX server 
– it then becomes a guessing game to identify the VM that is the source of the traffic.  
The addition of VirtualWisdom will dissipate the “virtual cloud” and open up the data-
path view from the VM to the LUN.  And since VirtualWisdom is a simple software add-
on to the existing NetWisdom product, it has an advantage over other products that 
might require new servers (physical or virtual) to be added to their infrastructure. 

Lessons Learned 

The IT team lead for this project suggests that customers should “invest the time to get 
the most out of the reporting, there’s a lot of data you can get if you know what you’re 
doing.” 

 

 

 

 

“I have been impressed by 

the demos of the 

VirtualWisdom product.  I’ve 
seen several products that 
will provide performance 
monitoring of CPU and 
memory utilization in the 
virtual infrastructure, but 
this is the only one I’ve seen 
that provides detailed SAN 
performance data on a per 

VM basis” 

-Senior SAN Administrator 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 100 Enterprise Way, Suite C-3  

Scotts Valley, CA 95066  
 
Phone: 831-439-4000  
 
Sales Information  
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Phone: 831-439-4080  
 
Customer Support  
support@virtualinstruments.com  
www.virtualinstruments.com 
 
 
©2009 Virtual Instruments. All rights 
reserved. Features and specifications are 
subject to change without notice 7/09 
 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

