 

 

FINANCIAL INSTITUTION 
CASE STUDY 

Challenges:  
• 

Fast Diagnosis and resolution 
of  SAN problems  
Fulfilling SLAs 

• 

Solution:  
• 

Virtual Instruments 
NetWisdom ProbeV software 
and professional services 
consulting 

 

 
Brokerage firm Deploys Virtual Instruments to 
maintain SLAs in a 30,000 port SAN 
Overview  
This financial management and advisory firm is one of the largest in the world, with 
more than $2 trillion in client assets.  It’s a leading provider of global corporate and 
investment banking services, including commercial lending, global high-yield debt, 
global equity, and global M&A.  Customer service and responsiveness are hallmarks of 
the firm, which means their IT infrastructure must be one of the most reliable in the 
world. 

IT Environment 

The IT department deploys a variety of servers, but relies primarily on EMC storage and 
Cisco fibre channel switches for their multiple datacenters. The IT department is tasked 
with maintaining extremely high service levels in the face of high storage growth and 
flat headcount.  The firm tries to constantly optimize all aspects of IT operations, which 
includes optimizing its use of storage infrastructure.  The firm is looking for additional 
savings through better use of the right storage platform.  Today, IT considers tiers as 
primarily “inside the array”.  Tomorrow, it needs to move data to non-monolithic-class 
arrays, while maintaining SLAs. 

NetWisdom Value 

According to the customer “NetWisdom changed the dialogue between the storage 
team and the server team, the database team and the business managers”.  Since they 
implemented NetWisdom ProbeV software to monitor their SAN, they gained 
tremendous visibility into their infrastructure that was not available previously.  
Diagnosing problems became much easier and faster, ultimately improving overall 
service to their user community. 

Hardware failures can be classified into two categories: unpredictable/sudden faults & 

 

 

Customer Benefits:  
• 

IT staff is more productive as 
problem identification and 
resolution  time is vastly 
reduced 
Problems  are reduced due to 
the predictive trending 
reports 
Vendor and inter-
departmental  finger pointing 
greatly reduced via unbiased 
answers 

• 

• 

 

 

 

 

 

“After the first month of 
deploying NetWisdom, the 
SAN team finally was able to 

sleep at night.” 

-Director of Storage 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

 

 

FINANCIAL INSTITUTION 
CASE STUDY 

predictable/borderline failures.  By analyzing fault trends, this customer reports that 
then can begin to see patterns of failure, and therefore catch the borderline cases 
before a major meltdown occurs.  With NetWisdom, the SAN Administrators can 
monitor fault trend reports to capture escalating errors before a total failure occurs.  
Replacing a failing component is a way to handle trend-able hardware failures to help 
prevent outages.  
Having successfully deployed the NetWisdom software, this customer is now 
researching the use of the Virtual Instruments ProbeFCX.  As part of the justification for 
bringing in NetWisdom hardware probes, the customer states that “a big value of the 
NetWisdom ProbeFCX is that it will allow me to deploy different vendors, and get the 
same metrics.  Once I bring in another vendor, it completely changes the price I pay for 
my SAN components.” 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

“NetWisdom changed the 

dialogue between the 

storage team and the server 

team, the database team 

and the business managers” 

-Director of Storage 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

100 Enterprise Way, Suite C-3  
Scotts Valley, CA 95066  
 
Phone: 831-439-4000  
 
Sales Information  
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Phone: 831-439-4080  
 
Customer Support  
support@virtualinstruments.com  
www.virtualinstruments.com 
 
 
©2009 Virtual Instruments. All rights 
reserved. Features and specifications are 
subject to change without notice 8/09 
 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

