healthCaRe

	 Client

Molina Healthcare, a 
provider of health services 
coordination and health 
information management 
solutions

	 Challenge

Deliver an agile 
infrastructure that will 
rapidly meet increased 
demand for services 
supporting government-
funded healthcare programs 

	 Solution

Vblock Systems

	 ReSultS

Increase application 
performance and speed 
provisioning while reducing 
data center footprint

www.vce.com

MOLINA HEALTHCARE RAMPS UP  

FAST FOR CLAIMS PROCESSING SPIKES 

WITH VBLOCK 

FoRtune	500	healthCaRe	SeRviCeS	pRovideR	aCCeleRateS	Rollout	oF	
CRitiCal	eleCtRoniC	mediCal	ReCoRdS	inFRaStRuCtuRe

Molina Healthcare, Inc., a FORTUNE 500 company, arranges the delivery of 
healthcare services or provides health information management solutions for 
nearly 4.3 million individuals and families who receive their care through Medicaid, 
Medicare and other government funded programs in 16 states. With $4.7 billion in 
revenues, Molina employs 5,200 people throughout the U.S.

Difficult economic conditions have generated skyrocketing demand for U.S. 
government health programs, resulting in huge increases in claims processing loads 
and rapid IT infrastructure growth at Molina. With citizens depending on Medicare, 
Medicaid and other insurance payments for critical healthcare services, Molina is 
bound by the states’ service-level agreements (SLAs) to provide these programs 
with extremely high application availability and performance.

Realizing its IT requirements were changing, Molina consolidated its 
infrastructure on Vblock™ Systems. Molina is now able to more rapidly 
provision its infrastructure to stay ahead of growing demand while easily 
meeting the states’ SLAs for top performance, availability and scalability.

“We’re	more	competitive	
because	we	can	provision	
new	infrastructures		
right	away and handle 
spikes in processing loads 
by the states without 
burdening our engineers. 
Our partnership with VCE 
has been very powerful. 
Everyone from their 
engineers to professional 
services to project 
managers is a member of 
our team and meets our 
expectations 110 percent.” 
— Marivi Stuchinsky, 
Associate Vice President, 
Enterprise Infrastructure 
Services, Molina Healthcare

the	Challenge
Prior to implementing Vblock systems, 
Molina ran a distributed infrastructure 
with separate storage, networking and 
compute environments. Deployment of 
new systems often took two months, 
making it difficult to ramp up capacity 
quickly as processing demand grew.

To gain the efficiencies enabled by a 
private cloud and IT-as-a-Service, Molina 
wanted to rapidly virtualize its entire 
infrastructure, including the servers, 
networks and storage. Because these 
environments were separate, there 
were significant technical challenges in 
delivering comprehensive virtualization.

the	Solution
As part of a detailed evaluation, Molina 
conducted a proof-of-concept of a Vblock 
system and several other solutions. VCE 
Professional Services deployed the Vblock 
system in only three days. The other 
vendors needed four weeks to implement 
their systems and one vendor wasn’t able 
to stand up its solution at all.

Impressed with VCE’s high-quality services 
and the Vblock system’s converged, fully 
virtualized infrastructure, Molina decided 
to standardize on Vblock Series 700 and 
Vblock Series 300. Molina’s applications 
running on the Vblock system include 
electronic medical records (EMR), J.D. 
Edwards financials and human resources 
and TriZetto claims administration, 
among other applications. Molina will 
also be rolling out a virtualized desktop 
infrastructure with VMware View. In 
addition to being located at Molina’s 
primary data centers, Vblock systems  
are implemented in Molina’s smaller sites  
to run departmental-based applications 
and file shares.

For additional protection, Molina is 
deploying EMC RecoverPoint remote data 
protection to replicate its Vblock systems 
located at data centers 400 miles apart 
for disaster recovery. EMC Data Domain 
deduplication storage systems for backup 
and recover are also integrated with the 
Vblock systems.

the	Results
Since deploying the Vblock systems, 
Molina has become more agile in 
responding to growth while increasing 
application performance and availability. 
The numerous benefits provided by the 
Vblock systems include:

•  Deployment of the Vblock systems 

and application migration to the 
new environment in only five days—
compared to two months previously

•  Improved total cost of ownership 

due to minimized requirements for 
implementation, administration and 
support resources; a 4:1 reduction in 
data center footprint, and decreased 
power and cooling usage

•  Application and storage performance 

boosts of 25-40 percent due to 
integrated compute, storage and 
network processing and automated 
storage tiering and caching

•  Predictable service levels and high 

application availability in accordance 
with state regulations and SLAs

 • Nearly instantaneous, simplified 

replenishment of compute, storage 
and networking resources to handle 
ongoing increases in processing loads

•  Simplified, faster virtualization of its 

entire infrastructure to enable private 
cloud and ITaaS

•  Increased availability of critical health 
applications, enabling faster and more 
reliable rollout of electronic medical 
records across 30 Molina clinics

Molina highly values its partnership with 
VCE. The single-call support combined 
with sophisticated management and 
provisioning software have simplified 
day-to-day management and significantly 
reduced time-to-resolution of any issues. 
Molina views VCE and Vblock Systems as 
essential enablers of its strategic roadmap 
and foresees a long-term partnership that 
will facilitate its growth and success.

 
Copyright © 2012 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, LLC. and/or its  
affiliates in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

www.vce.com

the	WoRld’S	moSt	advanCed	ConveRged	inFRaStRuCtuRe

