Pharmaceutical Case Study

Diagnosing Intermittent SAN Problems
Pharmaceutical Uses VirtualWisdom For Fast, Accurate Diagnosis
of Problem Delaying Critical SAP Upgrade

Company Background

This major healthcare and pharmaceutical company operates in 140 countries, with
global headquarters in Europe. The broad healthcare portfolio includes pharmaceuticals,
consumer health products, vaccines and diagnostics. The company has experienced
growth through acquisition as well as organic growth, and must meet pharmaceutical
regulatory requirements in many different countries.

IT Environment

The company's production systems, customer service and billing all run on SAP software
on IBM AIX servers in centralized European data centers.  The Storage Area Network
serving the SAP environment runs Brocade and IBM hardware. The company planned to
expand its deployment of SAP, adding new modules while upgrading to SAP R/3 6.0. To
support this upgrade, it needed to upgrade the SAN, adding new Brocade blades and
DCX switches.

Business Challenge

To optimize efficiencies in the creation and delivery of medications, diagnostics and other
healthcare products, the company has chosen to centralize and standardize its business
systems using SAP software.  When storage network problems delayed a major new SAP
implementation by six months, the company experienced both real costs and opportunity
costs. The new software deployment was stalled, delaying deployment of features, and
the company incurred increasing maintenance costs as they delayed retiring old, costly
equipment.

IT Challenge

The upgraded hardware in the SAN introduced intermittent problems, characterized by
overall instability that was difficult to pinpoint and diagnose. The IT team was under
pressure to make the SAP upgrade happen, but the storage team could not sign-off on
an unstable SAN. The company's IT team had to mediate between the storage
infrastructure supplier and the storage vendor. Finding intermittent problems is
notoriously difficult. Without visibility into the real root cause, no progress could be made
short of simply throwing more hardware at the problem.

The Virtual Instruments Solution

The pharmaceutical company turned to VirtualWisdom to help them find the root cause
of the SAN instability that was holding up the SAP upgrade. Unlike tools that rely on
averages or polling, VirtualWisdom supports a continuous, real-time capture of activity
across the SAN, with the ability to record and playback metrics.  The "playback" feature
let administrators identify when the problem occurred and roll back to find the root
cause.

Fast root cause analysis.  The company use VirtualWisdom to pinpoint the source of the
intermittent problems – in this case, faulty hardware among the new SAN infrastructure.
Faced with the detailed data, the vendor replaced the hardware components in question,
which solved the problem. After many months of delay, using VirtualWisdom the SAP
project was back on track in three weeks.

Challenges:

 Major SAN hardware











upgrade
Deployment of new
SAP modules and
upgrade to existing
SAP installation
SAN instability leads
to six month delay in
SAP
upgrade/deployment
Difficulty isolating and
identifying intermittent
instability in SAN
between multiple
vendors
Increased
maintenance costs
and opportunity costs
due to deployment
delay
Lack of vendor
agreement on the
source of the problem

Solution:


Virtual Instruments
VirtualWisdom
platform and services,
including the SAN
Performance and SAN
Availability Probes



Customer Benefits:

Fast root cause
analysis of intermittent
problem using record
and playback feature
Vendor-neutral metrics
and data supporting
hardware replacement
Rapid problem
remediation: project
back on track in three
weeks



"The ability to playback

events using

VirtualWisdom helped
us quickly find the root

cause of an elusive

problem that had been
escaping us for many

months."

IT Manager
Major Pharmaceutical

"VirtualWisdom let us
get quickly past the

blame issue and move
on to the solution, so

we could get the project

back on track."

IT Manager
Major Pharmaceutical

"SAP is absolutely

critical to our business
– having to delay the

upgrade was becoming
a serious problem. The

Virtual Instruments
team gave us the

insight we needed to

move forward”

IT Manager
Major Pharmaceutical

VirtualWisdom and SANInsight Topology

Better alignment of storage and whatever: With new insight into end-to-end
performance across the entire storage network, the company could proceed with the
SAP migration with minimal risk. Not only was the initial problem resolved, but
VirtualWisdom provided real-time, end-to-end insight into performance going forward,
reducing the risk of the SAP upgrade.

Customer Benefits

Specific VirtualWisdom benefits to the IT team include:



Rapid identification of the root cause of SAN instability that was slowing down
important SAP implementation and upgrade

 Quick problem resolution reduced the ongoing maintenance costs incurred by

supporting older equipment during the delay.









Vendor-neutral metrics and analysis, providing the necessary metrics to get
replacement hardware from vendor

Reduced risks of SAP upgrade by closely monitoring performance in real time

Successful migration of SAP instance to new storage environment

Performance optimization of new storage environment

 Constant monitoring of real-time SAN performance during migrations, upgrades, and

reconfigurations, to ensure that changes do not hurt application performance

Corporate Headquarters
25 Metro Drive Suite 400
San Jose, CA 95110
Phone:  408-579-4000
Fax:  408-579-4001

Sales
sales@virtualinstruments.com
Phone:  408-579-4081

Support
support@virtualinstruments.com

©2012 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are
trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or servicemarks
of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 06/12

