 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

BMO Financial Deploys Virtual Instruments SOS-4-SANs 
Service and VirtualWisdom® to Ensure Availability and 
Response Time of Business-Critical Online Trading 
Application 
 

Softchoice wins $800K in incremental business by partnering with Virtual 
Instruments 
 

Summary 

By partnering with Virtual Instruments, Softchoice closed $800K in incremental business - 
with minimal time invested - and helped the Bank of Montreal (BMO) ensure the 
performance and availability of its business-critical online trading application. 
 

Bank of Montreal Background 

Headquartered in Canada, BMO Financial Group serves 13 million personal, commercial, 
corporate and institutional customers in North America and internationally. BMO 
InvestorLine is an online investing service that provides self-directed investors with 
efficient trade execution for a wide range of investments including stocks, options, 
bonds, GICs and mutual funds.  Clients have access to trading, quotes and account 
information 24 hours a day through a website or Automated Telephone Trading.  
 

IT Environment 

The SAN infrastructure at BMO includes EMC storage running through a large Brocade 
fabric.  The servers are primarily IBM AIX-based. 
 

Business Challenge 

A significant percentage of BMO’s revenue comes from online brokerage transactions. 
While BMO InvestorLine has received awards from the Wall Street Journal and Canada’s 
“The Globe and Mail” newspaper, consumers have many online trading options.  If BMO 
cannot process financial transactions rapidly, consumers will take their business 
elsewhere.  For BMO, application performance directly correlates to revenue, and a 
slowdown can mean hundreds of thousands of dollars - even millions - in lost revenue.  
 

 
Challenge 

•  Performance issues with 

business-critical online 
trading application. 

 

 

Solution 

•  $800K deal for Virtual 

Instruments SOS-4-SANS 
services, VirtualWisdom 
software, and SANInsight 
TAP hardware.  

 
 

Softchoice Benefits 

•  Large enterprise 

incremental revenue 
opportunity with minimal 
time invested. Several 
additional opportunities 
are in development.  

 

 

BMO Benefits 

•  Potential application 

slowdowns can be more 
readily identified and 
corrected, often before 
the application user is 
even aware of them.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

CONFIDENTIAL TO VIRTUAL INSTRUMENTS  

 

 

IT Challenge 

BMO IT must ensure that business critical applications like InvestorLine are up and 
available to users 24x7x365, and that response time meets users’ expectations.  BMO 
administrators were encountering latencies in the SAN infrastructure that were directly 
impacting revenue.  Since IBM sold the switches into BMO and was responsible for 
support, they took the lead in identifying root cause and remediation, but slowdowns 
continued due to lack of meaningful SAN infrastructure data on a continuous, real-time 
basis.  Without this data and a measurement system, InvestorLine performance is 
difficult to optimize.  After several months of troubleshooting and the issues 
progressively worsening, BMO’s director of operations approached IBM to suggest using 
Virtual Instruments in the remediation efforts.  IBM agreed with the approach remarking 
that they had successfully engaged Virtual Instruments in the past to address similar 
situations.  It’s worth noting that VirtuaI Instruments had actually met with the BMO 
operations, infrastructure, and design teams long before the InvestorLine performance 
issues arose.  These highly skilled teams played a key role in influencing the BMO 
director of operations’ decision to work with Virtual Instruments in the remediation 
process. 

 

Virtual Instruments Solution Description 

Virtual Instruments recommended a one-week Virtual Instruments SOS-4-SANs service 
engagement to address latency issues in the SAN infrastructure.  SOS-4-SANs is 
designed for large enterprises struggling with SAN performance or availability issues that 
are negatively effecting business-critical applications. The SOS-4-SANs service relies on 
Virtual Instruments VirtualWisdom® infrastructure optimization solution, which is 
comprised of hardware and software probes that provide cross-domain monitoring, 
measurement, and analysis of the physical and virtual infrastructure.  By implementing 
the service, a number of anomalies were discovered and a remediation list of items to 

fix was created.  BMO line-of-
business (LOB) personnel saw 
such value in the service that 
they extended the 
engagement to two weeks.  A 
month later, more latency 
problems with InvestorLine 
surfaced and Virtual 
Instruments was contacted for 
a second service engagement 
that was also extended.  At 
that point BMO realized that 
they couldn’t live without the 
Virtual Instruments tool and 
quickly moved down the path 

CONFIDENTIAL TO VIRTUAL INSTRUMENTS  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

•  “Working with Virtual 
Instruments is about 
solving a customer 
business problem – not 
just chasing a PO.”  

 

  Geoff Wadham,  

  Softchoice Account Executive 

 

 

  

 

to acquisition of the hardware and software solution for optimizing their SAN 
infrastructure.  With Virtual Instruments, BMO can holistically assess the entire SAN 
infrastructure and get the data they need to make intelligent decisions about capacity, 
utilization, and performance for every layer of the infrastructure - network, server, 
storage, and applications.  The architecture diagram on the previous page is a simple 
representation of the deployment.  VirtualWisdom gets its data from the Brocade 
switches via SNMP, and from the physical layer via an optical splitter (TAP Patch Panel 
System).  The SANInsight ProbeFCX analyzes every Fibre Channel frame (transaction) in 
real-time to provide dozens of critical statistics about storage traffic, transmission errors, 
and SAN read and write latency.  
 

Softchoice Sales Team Working with Virtual Instruments 

BMO vendor management directed the local Virtual instruments team to Geoff Wadham, 
Softchoice enterprise account executive, since Softchoice does a significant amount of 
business at BMO.  Per Geoff, “Virtual Instruments did 95% of the positioning, 
presentations and product demos; Softchoice took it from the five-yard line managing 
sourcing, contracts and legal.”  The primary benefit, however, of working with Virtual 
Instruments was getting intelligence on why the InvestorLine application was not 
performing.  “There is no other tool in the market that can do this,” Geoff noted, “and 
Virtual Instruments is a differentiator that Softchoice can leverage to become more 
relevant to our clients.” As a partner, Softchoice struggles to be relevant to customers in 
terms of the actual business applications.  With Virtual Instruments, Softchoice has an 
innovative solution that can address customer concerns when an application isn’t 
performing. 
 

Key Takeaways 

The best opportunities for SOS-4-SANs services and the VirtualWisdom performance and 
availability optimization solution are in business-critical application environments.  When 
hundreds of thousands of dollars or more per hour are at stake, customers readily see 
the benefits. Often times OEM vendors position their own proprietary software solutions 
to solve complex SAN infrastructure problems that are not necessarily best for the 
customer.  Working with Virtual Instruments, Softchoice was able to provide a solution 
that best met BMO’s requirements.  Unlike other software products, VirtualWisdom is 
the only real-time monitoring solution for enterprise SANs available in the market today. 
 

CONFIDENTIAL TO VIRTUAL INSTRUMENTS  

