Ecommerce Business Deploys Virtual
Instruments’ VirtualWisdom to Gain Transaction
Visibility and Ensure SAN Uptime
De-risked datacenter migration and Oracle consolidation
project

Company Background
The company, with revenues growing 33% year over year, is one of the leading e-
commerce businesses allowing payments and money transfers to be made securely
through the internet. The payment service is as an electronic alternative to traditional
paper methods such as checks and money orders and operates in over 100 markets
with millions of accounts.

IT Environment
The HDS storage environment in their U.S. datacenters includes USP-V and VSP for
tier-one storage and AMS for tier-two, running through a Brocade Fiber Channel SAN
fabric totaling 2400 ports and over 400 SAN connected hosts (Solaris and AIX).
Primary applications are deployed on very large Oracle databases, with over 8
petabytes of storage and roughly 50% yearly growth.  Hosts are primarily Solaris, AIX,
and Linux based.

Business Challenge
The company’s revenues come from online financial transactions.  While this company
is one of the leaders in this space, consumers have many choices when paying online.
In the physical world, if you are standing in line to pay for something
In the local grocery store, and one line appears to be slow, you will move to another line.
So it is in the online world.  If one online payment option is slow or has an outage,
consumers will move over to another option, such as paying by another credit card. For
this business, online performance and uptime directly equate to revenue.  A slowdown for
any reason can mean hundreds of thousands of dollars, or even millions of dollars are
lost.  And a severe outage would be front page news in financial publications around the
world.

IT Challenges
The primary objective of the IT department is to support the growth and smooth

Challenges:
 Keep IT infrastructure up and

running 24x7x365 at peak
performance.

 Huge growth in Oracle

databases and escalating costs
of IT in a hyper competitive
market put pressure on staff to
do more with existing staff
resources, and to optimize
CAPEX

 Migration of mission critical
Oracle applications across
datacenters and consolidated
storage arrays had to be
performed flawlessly

 Inordinate amount of IT staff

and vendor services time spent
on trying to diagnose SAN
problems

 SAN team lacked the tool

necessary to move to a
chargeback model, to provide
QoS environment to its
customers

Solution:
 Virtual Instruments

VirtualWisdom software and
SANInsight Tap Patch Panel
Systems and SAN

 Performance Probe monitoring,

and professional services
consulting

www.virtualinstruments.com

Customer Benefits:

 Used in test lab to validate
vendor claims and test for
compatibility issues

 Reduction in CAPEX and OPEX

by reducing over provisioning
of ports

 Tracks SAN performance in real

time during migrations,
upgrades, and reconfigurations,
to ensure that changes do not
hurt application performance,
and to provide assurances to
the Oracle DB, host and
application teams that latency
changes during the migration /
consolidation events are within
expected ranges

 Potential application slow-
downs can be more easily
identified and corrective action
taken, often before the
application consumer is even
aware of a problem

 Provides SAN team the tools
necessary to move to a cloud
or chargeback model, to
provide a QoS environment to
its customers

 Integrated TAPs and patch
panels provide immediate
access to all network traffic
without downtime or disruption
to live environment

operation of the business unit. IT must ensure new applications are rolled out quickly and
reliably, applications are up and available to users 24x7x365, and application response
times to the users meet their expectations.  The challenge facing the IT administrators is
really one of transaction visibility through the I/O system, getting meaningful data about
their infrastructure on a continuous, real-time basis. Without this data and measurement
system, application performance is difficult to optimize, and every application demands
the most expensive, tier 1 storage.
Most recently, in 2012, the team was challenged with moving its primary production
datacenter 500 miles, at the same time consolidating its two most mission critical Oracle
databases from two HDS USP/Vs to one VSP.

The Virtual Instruments Solution
VirtualWisdom offers instrumentation, monitoring, and analysis platform that simplifies
the lives of IT storage professionals.  With Virtual Instruments, the eCommerce company
can holistically assess the entire multi-vendor SAN infrastructure, and get the data
necessary to make intelligent decisions about capacity, utilization, and performance for
every layer of the infrastructure - network, server, storage, and applications.  Vendor
finger-pointing is nearly eliminated, making both customers and the vendor service
organizations more productive.

The diagram above is a simple representation of the deployment.  VirtualWisdom gets its
data from the Brocade switches via SNMP, and from the physical layer via an optical
splitter (Tap Patch Panel System).  This TPPS provides real-time, bit-for-bit copy of all
traffic, unlike switch mirror or SPAN ports. The SAN Performance Probe analyzes every
Fibre Channel frame (transaction) in real-time to provide dozens of critical statistics about
storage traffic, transmission errors, and SAN read and write latency.

For the datacenter migration, the customer (1) benchmarked the application performance
at the old datacenter, (2) tracked the latency metrics during the migration, and (3)
provided assurance once the migration/consolidation was complete that there was no
negative effect on application performance.  Additionally, the customer used
VirtualWisdom to instrument and analyze the new SAN, remediating several physical and
configuration problems before the production applications went live.  Issues found and
remediated included:

www.virtualinstruments.com

1. Multi-path configuration errors, including causing excessive link utilization
2. Missing or incorrect nicknames
3. HBA queue depths set too high
4. CRC errors
5. Class 3 discards
6. Loss of synchronization, loss of signal, link resets and link failures
7. Two SFPs were found to be out of spec
8. Vendor monitoring software was causing performance impact

This last issue was serious enough that without VirtualWisdom, the customer was
prepared to fail back to the old storage arrays, rather than risk performance problems on
its mission critical Oracle applications.

Customer Benefits
 Potential application slow-downs can be proactively identified and corrective action
taken before the application consumer experiences a problem and chooses another
online payment vendor

 Reduced over-provisioning of array front end ports, with no risk to performance

 Test and development lab can more easily validate vendor claims and test for

compatibility issues

 Over time, will help to optimize tiering by validating latency against baseline values

when LUNs are moved to lower cost tiers, and to “right tier” in the first place

 Tracks SAN performance in real time during migrations, upgrades, and

reconfigurations, to ensure that changes do not hurt application performance, and to
provide assurances to the DB, host and application teams that changes during the
events are within expected ranges

 Substantial reduction in the need to replace suspected bad SAN components

because of superior fault diagnosis, which saves on both CAPEX and OPEX

 Significant reduction in finger pointing between IT departments and with vendors;

can provide better metrics to the vendors to assist them in making real-world
decisions on migrations and upgrades

 Over time, IT staff plans to use VirtualWisdom to help balance over-utilized and

under-utilized ports and reduce links that are too heavily subscribed.

 Immediate access to all network traffic without downtime or disruption to live

environment enables dynamic connection of analysis, monitoring, and security
devices into fibre optic networks

 Quantitative modelling helps eliminate “rules of thumb” capacity and performance

planning; provides critical input for future purchasing decisions.

 Over time, expected to help enable the IT infrastructure management team to

generate, promote, and comply with service level agreements, provide SLAs, and
demonstrate the health of the SAN via dashboard displays in the Network Operations
Center.

“If you’ve got a SAN refresh
coming up, TAP your switches.
Just put them in. Our Oracle team
can report performance figures at a
one-second granularity.  With the
TAPs and hardware monitoring, so
can we.”

Senior Manager Network and
Storage Engineering
eCommerce Business

With VI, we were able to track link
utilization and it enabled us to save
a boatload of dough by reducing
the number of storage front-end
ports.  We went from 128 ports to
64, and then to 32 per new frame.
That’s a savings of over $300K per
array.”

Operations Manager Network
and Storage Engineering
eCommerce Business

“Before VI, our latest storage
upgrade would have been an all-
hands-on-deck call-out and my
team would have been severely
criticized for what could have been
interpreted as a real problem.  With
VI monitoring, we could
demonstrate, in real-time, that
longer latencies were due to the
upgrade and not by any real
problems in the SAN”.

Senior Manager Network and
Storage Engineering
eCommerce Business

www.virtualinstruments.com

Corporate Headquarters
25 Metro Drive Suite 400
San Jose, CA 95110
Phone:  408-579-4000
Fax:  408-579-4001

European Headquarters
One Kingdom Street
Paddington Central * London W2 6BD
Phone:  44 (0) 203 402 3353

Sales
sales@virtualinstruments.com
Support
support@virtualinstruments.com

©2012 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are
trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or servicemarks
of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 08/12

www.virtualinstruments.com

