INFORMATION	SECURITY 	
AND	COMPLIANCE

	 CLIENT

Qualys, a leading provider 
of cloud-based solutions 
for information security and 
compliance 

	 CHALLENGE

Address the needs of global 
customers that want the 
full security and compliance 
features of an on-premise 
QualysGuard solution

	 SOLUTION

VCE Vblock System 200

	 RESULTS

Reduced solution delivery 
cycles by 50 percent 
while lowering costs and 
improving reliability; enabled 
global business expansion

www.vce.com

QUALYS EXPANDS BUSINESS WITH 

PRIVATE CLOUD SOLUTION USING 

VBLOCK SYSTEMS 

CLOUD	SERVICE	PROVIDER	ACCELERATES	DELIVERY	OF	ON-PREMISE 	
SECURITY	AND	COMPLIANCE	SOLUTION	FROM	THREE	MONTHS	TO	SIX 	
WEEKS;	OPENS	DOOR	TO	NEW	GLOBAL	MARKETS 	

Delivering cloud solutions to 6,000-plus customers in more than 100 countries, 
Qualys helps businesses simplify security operations and lower compliance costs 
with its award-winning QualysGuard Cloud Platform and integrated suite of 
solutions. However, some customers facing geopolitical issues, data sovereignty 
regulations, and growing complexity in securing large, distributed IT infrastructures 
requested a private cloud solution that could be hosted in their own data centers to 
retain full control of underlying security data.

Using pre-engineered VCE™ Vblock™ Systems, Qualys was able to create a private 
cloud solution for deployment at customer sites. The fully-integrated and tested 
Vblock Systems helped Qualys speed time-to-delivery, reduce costs, and ensure 
reliable performance in remote customer sites that are costly and difficult to reach 
for support. The on-premise offering using Vblock Systems also helped Qualys  
serve new markets, including government agencies and service providers,  
driving business growth and expansion.

“Vblock™	System	200	has	
been	a	tremendous	enabler	
of	our	rapid	growth. We 
would not be able to fulfill 
as many customer orders 
without the quality and 
efficiency of this well-
engineered converged 
infrastructure.”

— Peter Albert, Vice President 
of Operations, Qualys

The	Challenge
Previously, to meet the needs of 
customers requesting on-premise 
solutions, Qualys needed to source 20 to 
40 discrete components from numerous 
vendors to build systems at its own 
facility before disassembling, packing, 
and shipping equipment to customer sites 
where systems were rebuilt. This process 
wasted six to eight weeks of production 
time and relied on highly-specialized 
cloud operations engineers, which drove 
up costs. Quality was also an issue, with a 
higher chance for individual components 
to fail while systems were built and tested.

The	Solution
Qualys standardized on VCE Vblock 
System 200 to deliver its QualysGuard 
Private Cloud solution. With Vblock 
System 200, Qualys is extending its full 
suite of vulnerability management, policy 
compliance, malware detection, and 
other security services into the physical 
perimeter of a customer’s enterprise. 
The solution serves customers of all sizes 
across the globe, including government 
and military facilities that may be restricted 
from consuming services via a public cloud.

The	Results
Vblock System 200 provides Qualys with 
a strategic tool for business expansion, 
enabling the deployment of more on-
premise QualysGuard solutions in the 
fourth quarter of 2013 than in the entire 
previous year. Thanks to a pre-engineered 
converged infrastructure, Qualys eliminated 
weeks of assembly time and reduced 
the overall solution delivery cycle by 50 
percent—from three months to six weeks. 

Instead of managing multiple vendors 
and a myriad of components, Qualys is 
able to provide a powerful solution for 
its customers with a single system from 
one vendor, greatly simplifying solution 
deployment. High-value cloud engineers no 
longer spend time on shipping, receiving, 
and piecing together components, 
resulting in significant cost savings that are 
passed on to customers. Also, customers 
benefit from a turnkey, white-glove solution 
that allows Qualys engineers to focus on 
maximizing performance and availability  
of cloud services.

With virtualization, along with the high-
performance, high-density compute 
power of Vblock System 200, Qualys 
also reduced the physical size of its 
QualysGuard Private Cloud solution. 
While a single instance of the Qualys 
Private Cloud infrastructure can fill up 
to 28 cabinets, Vblock System 200 
delivers the entire solution in a single 
cabinet that consumes just one floor tile 
in a customer’s data center. Yet, Vblock 
System 200 still has room to spare, 
so Qualys can scale the solution as a 
customer grows. 

In addition, Vblock System 200 enables 
Qualys to streamline upgrades for larger 
customers with strict data center policies, 
such as six-week application cycles. Since 
Vblock System 200 constitutes a single 
SKU, Qualys can simply slide in additional 
capacity or add more services without 
going through those cycles each time.

For Qualys, the most important aspects 
of Vblock Systems are quality engineering 
and craftsmanship. The company ships 
Vblock Systems to some of the world’s 
largest, most prestigious organizations. 
Having a system built on technologies 
from Cisco, EMC, and VMware provides 
instant credibility and evokes trust. 
This credibility and trust are especially 
important to Qualys, which as a security 
company, depends on providing 
reliable solutions and building trusted 
relationships with customers.

Qualys also values its strong relationship 
with VCE. The two companies are 
partnering to further streamline solution 
delivery by remotely loading the Qualys 
database and applications onto Vblock 
Systems at the VCE factory. This will 
allow complete QualysGuard solutions 
to ship directly from VCE, shaving an 
additional two weeks from delivery 
cycles and reducing shipping expenses. 
It will also enable Qualys to accelerate 
global business expansion with a reliable, 
cost-effective, and scalable security and 
compliance solution easily deployed on 
the customer’s premises.

Copyright © 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. VCE, VCE Vision, Vblock, and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company LLC. 
or its affiliates in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

www.vce.com

THE	WORLD’S	MOST	ADVANCED	CONVERGED	INFRASTRUCTURE

