 

 

      FINANCIAL SERVICES 
CASE STUDY 

 

Challenges:  
• 

Escalating costs of IT in a 
hyper-competitive market 
puts pressure on staff to do 
more with existing CAPEX and 
OPEX 

• 

Backing up the reactive 
replication strategy with a 
proactive problem avoidance 
strategy 

 
Raymond James Deploys Virtual Instruments’ 
VirtualWisdom to monitor its SAN to continue ensuring 

100% data availability 

Overview  

Raymond James, founded in 1962 and a public company since 1983, is a diversified financial 
services holding company with subsidiaries engaged primarily in investment and financial 
planning, in addition to investment banking and asset management.  More than 5,300 financial 
advisors serve approximately 1.9 million accounts in approximately 2,300 locations throughout 
the United States, Canada and overseas. In addition, total client assets are approximately $223 
billion, of which approximately $29 billion are managed by the firm’s asset management 
subsidiaries.   

IT Environment  

With the major datacenter in St. Petersburg, Florida and a hot backup site in Southeastern 
Michigan, the IT staff supports over a thousand servers, 90% of which are Windows based, 
including a fast growing number of VMware ESX hosts supporting hundreds of virtual machines.  
There are almost 2,000 switch ports, supporting 200 storage ports and 400TB of data, in both 
facilities.  Data is split between EMC DMX and Clariion systems, with the applications requiring 
replication deployed on the DMXs.  The current ratio of server to storage ports averages 16:1. 

Like many IT departments, Raymond James is challenged with tight budgets and with getting 
more and more performance out of existing hardware assets and personnel.  The SAN team’s 
success is measured by a simple metric: keep the data available; no excuses.  So taking a purely 
reactive approach to SAN troubleshooting and performance optimization was out of the 
question.  Getting the job done by massive over-provisioning, so often seen in major 
datacenters, was likewise not an option due to budget constraints. 

Role of VirtualWisdom 

A more proactive approach to system availability was needed, and in early 2008, Raymond 

 

 

 

• 

• 

•  Determining which servers 

need dedicated storage ports  
Identifying the top storage 
users and quickly seeing 
trends 
Being alerted to failing 
components and quickly 
replacing them before users 
are impacted  

Solution:  
• 

Virtual Instruments 
VirtualWisdom and 
professional services 
consulting 

Customer Benefits:  
• 

Causes of potential 
application slow-downs 
identified and corrective 
action provided before users 
are even aware of a problem 

• 

 
 
 

Reduction in the need to 
replace suspected bad SAN 
components because of 
superior fault diagnosis, 
which saves on both CAPEX 
and OPEX 

“The services consultants 

sent out were 

knowledgeable, efficient and 

very easy to work with.”  

-Doug Ward 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

 

 

      FINANCIAL SERVICES 
CASE STUDY 
Storage Analyst 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

James deployed VirtualWisdom, both software ProbeVs and a Fiber Channel ProbeFCX along 
with a 144 port rover in the St. Petersburg datacenter.  After the initial 2-day installation service, 
the storage team spent three weeks establishing a baseline, and built filters and alerts for 
metrics that give an early indication of trouble.   VirtualWisdom sees loss of sync, link resets, 
packet discards, aborts, code violations, and CRC errors and can send alarms for out-of-bounds 
conditions.  Every few months, a new baseline is reviewed and established to accommodate the 
changes in the SAN infrastructure.  Additionally, a daily report on the top ten servers by 
utilization is sent up the management chain, as a quick way to get a meaningful trend of storage 
usage. 

Troubleshooting the SAN  

According to Raymond James, VirtualWisdom has enabled them to continue quickly responding 
to potential performance and availability problems, and “isolate issues in a timely manner”, well 
before any impact on the application users.   

As an example of fast troubleshooting, on a number of occasions, the VirtualWisdom dashboard 
alerted to CRC errors, and made it easy to diagnose bad Switch Route Processors (SRPs) on Inter-
Switch Links (ISLs).  The issue was identified and resolved without extensive detective work. 

In another example, after one of the first ESX host upgrades at Raymond James, the SAN staff 
used VirtualWisdom to quickly notice that a number of servers were incorrectly configured to go 
down the same I/O path.  Multi-pathing was quickly re-enabled, before the application users 
were affected. 

Optimizing Hardware 

Thanks to the benefits of server virtualization, Raymond James has stopped the explosion of 
server sprawl, and with an average 10:1 guest to host ratio, is repurposing existing servers as 
ESX hosts.  Additionally, the number of SAN links is stabilizing, and VirtualWisdom is being used 
to verify that the network consolidation doesn’t impact performance. 

Lessons Learned 

When asked what he would recommend to all new VirtualWisdom customers, Doug Ward, 
Storage Analyst replies “Spend as much time as you can with the services people learning how to 
develop reports”.  We could not agree more.  VirtualWisdom is a powerful platform, and utilizing 
the expertise of Virtual Instruments’ QuickStart services pays for itself many times over in 
helping to reduce CAPEX and OPEX. 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

“I like the VirtualWisdom 
dashboard; I can log in and 

immediately see  if 

something’s yellow or red 

and needs attention” 

-Doug Ward 
Storage Analyst 

 

 25 Metro Drive, Suite 400  

San Jose, CA 95110  
 
Sales Information  
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
 
Customer Support  
support@virtualinstruments.com  
www.virtualinstruments.com 
 
 
©2009 Virtual Instruments. All rights 
reserved. Features and specifications are 
subject to change without notice 11/09 
 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

