Internal Sales Success Flash 

 

 

SC Johnson Deploys Virtual Instruments’ 
VirtualWisdom® to Gain Transaction Visibility 
and Ensure SAN Uptime  

Summary 

By aggressively ensuring that multiple IT departments were exposed to the VirtualWisdom 
value propositions, and by conducting a well orchestrated POV that addressed all the 
customer concerns, the U.S. account team was able to accelerate the sales cycle and 
bring in a substantial initial order of $80,000, even though the customer had no CAPEX 
budget available.  

SC Johnson Background 

A 125-year-old company, SC Johnson is one of the world’s leading makers of household 
brands. Employing 12,000 people and generating $8B in sales, with operations in over 70 
countries, the company is headquartered in Racine, Wisconsin, where it was founded. 
The product portfolio includes global brands such as Pledge®, Duck®, Mr. Muscle®, 
Windex®, Scrubbing Bubbles®, Glade®, Raid®, OFF!®, Baygon® and Ziploc®. 

IT Environment 

The data centers are in Racine, Wisconsin, and Waxdale, Wisconsin for DR.  Servers are 
primarily HP, with Brocade FC switches and EMC Symmetrix and CLARiiON  storage.  
VMware is widely deployed and the customer is running SAP on AIX/VIO hosts. 

IT Challenge 

The IT staff was looking for an SRM and a VMware solution to improve the visibility and 
ease of management of their datacenter infrastructure.  The existing EMC and Brocade 
tools were not deemed to be able to meet the growing needs of the staff with regards to 
maximizing performance and availability. 

Sales Cycle 

SC Johnson entered the VI world via the SNW show in late 2010.  More recently, the 
Great Lakes sales team engaged with the IT staff due to prior relationships.  The SCJ 
team liked the value proposition, but when they seemed to balk at the initial price 
estimates, the sales team knew they had a challenge. 

A bellwether event was a customer and prospect get-together at a Milwaukee Brewers 
baseball game.  The SAN Manager, Jim Melcher, got to rub elbows with other companies 
like GE Healthcare, Snap-On Tools, and American Family Insurance, who are talking with 
VI and he came away with a feeling that by talking with VI, he was part of a trend, not 
alone.  During some one-on-one time with Jim, the VI team communicated the success 
we are having as a company and most notably, how we’re helping other companies to 
de-risk applications in AIX/VIO environments. The ball game led to follow-on meetings 
that in turn led to an agreement to do a POV. 

The POV was conducted very structured, including a detailed success criteria checklist, 
which the VI SC was able to complete for the customer, based on detailed customer 

 

 

 
Challenges:  
• 

Lack of visibility of the 
infrastructure 

 

•  Hesitancy for running VIO 
in an AIX environment due 
to perceived risks to SAP 
implementation 

•  Current tools were judged 

to be inadequate for 
ensuring maximum 
application performance 
and availability 

Initial Solution:  
• 

VirtualWisdom ProbeSW 
(406 links),three TAP Patch 
Panels and a QuickStart 
Service. 

•  Additional 90 day ProbeSW 

and ProbeVM evaluation 
licenses for use in 
production environments 

Customer Benefits:  
•  Potential application slow-
downs can be more easily 
identified and corrective 
action taken, often before 
the application consumer is 
even aware of a problem 

•  Proactively prevent 

slowdowns and outages 

Improve SAN utilization 
and new deployment 
planning 

• 

 
 
 

“Mike Salins’ and Stew 

Carless’ involvement during 
the week of the POV was 
key to accelerating the 

sales cycle”. 

Chuck DeMars 
RSM, Great Lakes 

 

 

                                       VIRTUAL INSTRUMENTS INTERNAL ONLY 

 

 

Internal Sales Success Flash 

 

 

discussions.  The key was the VI team’s understanding of the customer environment. 

A key question posed prior to the POV was “how many SC Johnson people will be 
engaged throughout the POV and who are they?”  Based on the answer, VI 
recommended that presentations should be made to all the stakeholders.  This turned out 
to be a tremendous success and created a lot of buzz at the customer.  This turned into a 
wide base of support when they started to look for the budget for VI. Everyone knew what 
it was and what it meant for them.  Some of the other groups included the server group 
with VMware responsibility, the UNIX/AIX team, the management team from the first level 
(outsourced) support group, and of course, senior IT management. 

The PAK arrived on Monday, was installed on Tuesday, the team spent Wednesday and 
Thursday onsite going through dashboards and evangelizing to all the different buying 
influences.  Friday was the presentations, including screenshots and descriptions of all 
the things they wanted to see, and the value to each group.  By the time the senior 
manager walked into the room, he already knew that everyone loved what they saw.  And 
Friday afternoon was decommissioning the PAK and shipping it home.  

Because it was a direct deal, getting set up in the SC Johnson procurement system for 
the POV TAP allowed the VI team to  close a follow-on deal within the same quarter. 

The deal was structured so that VI would cover their production datacenter with SAN 
Availability Probes, and install TAPS as well.  The customer saw a lot more value in our 
hardware probes but did not have the budget, so ninety-day eval license was set up for 
additional SAN Availability Probe licenses for their secondary site and for Virtual Server 
Probes.  On a monthly basis the VI team will revisit the budget with the customer, to get 
the additional spend. 

VirtualWisdom Value Props 

The customer is confident that potential application slow-downs can be more easily 
identified, and with the greater awareness of the infrastructure, they can more easily and 
proactively prevent slowdowns and outages.  Though it was not originally an 
expectation, the POV made them aware that they can actually improve SAN utilization 
and optimize new deployment planning. 

The SC Johnson VMware team is particular impressed with how easy it is to create ad 
hoc dashboard widgets, and the VI team was able to give the customer metrics in 
minutes, that their current team had struggled for weeks to deliver! 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

                                       VIRTUAL INSTRUMENTS INTERNAL ONLY 

 

 
SUCCESS FLASH 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
01/19/12 

