CASE STUDY

Outsourcer offers IT infrastructure as a service
for its public and private sector customers
offering the benefits of a dedicated solution in a
shared environment.
Overview

This company is a service and outsourcing company that has been delivering essential
public services for more than 40 years. More than 100,000 employees deliver mission-
critical services to government and private clients in over 30 countries.

IT Environment

This outsourcer has a multi-level shared infrastructure at two sites. The information
technology infrastructure is provided by multiple vendors, including IBM Intel x86-based
servers running VMware 4.1, (200 Virtual Machines in their Bourneville Headquarters and
160 at the Gravely site), Cisco IP networking, Brocade SANs, Emulex HBAs, a mixture of
Hitachi Data Systems and EMC storage front-ended by a HDS VSP – all supported by
dual resilient fibre optic connections and asynchronous replication between them.  They
are nearly 100% virtualised and run both 4Gb and 8Gb fibre channel components within
the Storage Area Network (SAN).

Challenges

The shared services market is experiencing rapid growth compared to traditional
dedicated single customer infrastructures. To stay ahead of their competition this
outsourcer enables its customers to get all the benefits of a dedicated solution within a
shared environment. This outsourcer is continuously driving to reduce cost.  Most IT
hosting organisations provide their customers with easy access to their data but do not
provide a service level agreement (SLA) for application performance. This outsourcer
wanted to provide fast, reliable and cost efficient application hosting for their customers
by providing a secure shared IT environment including performance based SLAs.

Role of VirtualWisdom – a proactive approach

The Service Portfolio and Product Manager and Senior Infrastructure Consultant for
Storage and Backup manage the shared service infrastructure. One of their key initiatives
is to provide a real-time performance view for their customer’s infrastructure and
applications within the shared service supported with performance SLAs.

“From a Common Delivery Infrastructure (CDI) perspective we are a virtual platform,
everything we are trying to do is virtual. One of the things that has driven us to Virtual
Instruments is that if it had been installed a year ago one of our major customers would not
have gone back to physical servers. This outsourcer could never prove that it was the
customer database application that was causing a problem, because it was just as slow on
physical as it was on virtual.” said Senior Infrastructure Consultant. “They were the
customer that drove us to monitor the environment. We couldn’t do monitoring before,
everything was based on looking at logs on VMware, looking at performance management
files from Hitachi Data Systems and EMC and doing ‘after the fact’ analysis – we lacked

Challenges:

 Provide a fast, resilient

shared services environment
for multiple customers and
their multiple applications.

 Provide SLAs for hosted
application performance.

Solution:

 VirtualWisdom SAN

Availability Probe, SAN
Performance Probe, Virtual
Server Probe, and SANInsight
TAPs

Customer Benefits:

 With VirtualWisdom, root

causes of potential
application slowdowns can
be quickly identified and
corrective action taken before
users are even aware of a
problem.

 Improved shared services

environment delivering a cost
efficient solution, with
guaranteed SLAs, has been
instrumental in increasing
customer confidence and
business growth

WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM

CASE STUDY

the ability to look at end-to-end transaction time, and give us an overview of what the
environment was doing. The whole point of the redesign, eighteen months ago, was to
move us away from just selling spindles to actually selling infrastructure as a service - and
being able to prove that we are providing a guaranteed level of service”

There were lots of discussion around the actual causes; people believed it to be VMware,
or the storage, or the SAN, or the network but they could never pin it down.

“Within minutes of us logging onto the VirtualWisdom application we were pointing out
issues with the customer’s environment, but we missed the boat in getting them to stop
going physical. We spent a lot of money going to physical to prove to the customer that it
wasn’t the virtualisation layer causing the problem.” stated the Service Portfolio Manager.
“Now we are in a position where we can actually pin point accurately where the errors are.
Some of the errors we are seeing we would never have picked up before implementing
VirtualWisdom”.

In addition to finding and quickly resolving issues this outsourcer wanted to optimise its
existing and future investments and enable it to provision ‘performance capacity’ rather
than just capacity.

“We offer customers a performance tiering solution, from dynamic tiering where they get
to use solid state disks all the way down to SATA. At the moment we have 5 different tiers.
We control where it comes from and its maximum performance. The one thing we hadn’t
been able to do until now is to give customers detailed reports on that performance. Some
customers like to know what’s going on and we’ve not been able to do that.  We would
have people complaining their databases were slow and blaming the storage and we’d
have no way of proving or disproving it. We’d have to spend hours of our time going
through how it’s built, what they asked for, and what it’s doing.  Over the last 18 months
we’ve decided to move away from that kind of model and the missing piece was being
able to monitor and report on the whole environment”.

VirtualWisdom provides a unique end-to-end view of the infrastructure enabling This
outsourcer to proactively address all issues and performance inhibitors, enabling them to
proactively find and resolve issues before they affect customer performance. This
outsourcer’s existing tools provide management of the infrastructure elements, but not the
unique end-to end view of the whole infrastructure.

“We are getting to a stage where we have such a big platform, and so many different
customers, we need to know if one customer is causing a problem for another customer.
If one customer is having a problem caused by the hardware it might become a problem
for another customer. Before VirtualWisdom was installed we were pretty much blind.
Customers expect a higher level of service. They expect us to be able to tell them what is
going on”. “Each individual area could tell us what was happening with their components
but we had no way of linking it all together and there was a big black hole in the middle.
Data left the storage frame and appeared at the vCenter box but we had no clue what was
going on in the middle. I was completely oblivious to this until we met with Virtual
Instruments and they pointed out ‘this is the bit you can’t see’. We needed something that
gave us an end-to- end view of the infrastructure – so we weren’t in the situation where,
for example,  the VM looks OK, the storage looks OK, ‘well it can’t be us then’, and hoping
it wasn’t this big black hole in the middle that was causing the problem.

“One of the reasons for going down the Virtual Instruments route was to stop us having
multiple monitoring tools that only monitor their own devices.  We needed one that

Key Value Drivers:

 VirtualWisdom provides this
outsourcer with the ability to
offer real-time performance
views for key customers and
applications within a shared
service supported with
performance SLAs.

 Optimization of existing and
future investments (Storage,
SAN, Physical & Virtual
Servers) enabling This
outsourcer to provision
“Performance Capacity”
rather than just “Capacity”

 VirtualWisdom provides a
unique multi -vendor view
enabling this outsourcer to
proactively address all
existing infrastructure issues
& performance inhibitors
enabling problems to be
caught before they affect
customer performance.

WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM

CASE STUDY

comprehensively views everything and tells the truth, because some of the enterprise
management tools don’t.  We needed a single pane view of the entire data path so we can
just go and have a look at the storage, go and have a look at the fabric, go and have a look
at the servers – VirtualWisdom lets us actually do the end-to-end lifecycle of a transmit and
a receive” said the Portfolio Manager.

“Within hours of installing the VirtualWisdom Proof of Value (POV), it pointed out we had a
faulty SFP in one of the HDS VSP ports. Without VirtualWisdom we wouldn’t have known
we were having that problem or the effect of that problem”. “Another thing that came out
was information that would save us buying new servers by expanding some memory,
which is significantly cheaper. This allows us to put more VMs into the environment
without buying more hardware. It’s saving us money as we grow.”

This outsourcer could provide reports on uptime and availability SLAs that they could be
measured against, but they wanted to prove application performance via SLAs.

The Portfolio Manager continued “VirtualWisdom gives us the ability to see what we are
doing, make improvements where we can, and then to look at what SLAs we can offer
customers around the different tiers, different services and even different time bands.
Between 9:00am and 5:00pm we are not doing backups, so we may be able to offer a
higher SLA within those times – or worst case, see if the backups affect those areas. We
also want to be proactive to see problems before they affect performance. I particularly like
VirtualWisdom’s ability to drill down to one of a particular customer’s servers, that we
thought was causing us issues, and then scroll back in time to watch what it was doing.”

This outsourcer implemented both the VirtualWisdom SAN Availability Probe and the
VirtualWisdom Virtual Server Probe as well the Traffic Access Points (TAPs) across its
entire Brocade SAN environment so it would never again have to break an application to
do problem analysis. The TAPs split a small portion of the fibre-optic signal from the fibre
channel fabric and send it to the VirtualWisdom SAN Performance Probe for out-of band
traffic analysis of the frame headers.  This enables full real-time monitoring of the whole
infrastructure regardless of vendor and without intrusive software agents.

So, what is this outsourcer’s plan for the future?

The team is very concerned about optimizing the cost of their IT infrastructure.  They
know they have been unnecessarily over-provisioning as a safeguard against performance
and availability problems, but they simply didn’t have the rights tools to stop over-
provisioning and ensure SLA adherence.

“VirtualWisdom is going to help us drive the next generation of our service and our
products which will bring in more customers and revenue. It will help us prove that we
already have enough storage, SAN, and physical and virtual servers for now and we won’t
have to make another significant investment. We’re in a much better place than we used
to be and it’s driving customer uptake”.

Summary

VirtualWisdom provides the end-to-end view This outsourcer needs to optimise its
infrastructure and provide an improved service to their customers.

“We’ve done a good job. We have moved from an unstable, undesirable platform to
something that customers want to use. Some of our biggest customers are talking to us
about using our services as confidence and trust is building. Virtual Instruments gives us

 This outsourcer’s existing

tools provide element
management of the
infrastructure based on
polling technology, not the
unique end to end view
VirtualWisdom delivers in
real-time, meaning this
outsourcer was blind to
infrastructure issues.

“We’re in a much better place

than we used to be and it’s
driving customer uptake.”

Portfolio Manager

WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM

CASE STUDY

that added element of being able to prove to them that we are trustworthy enough to do it.
I don’t know anybody else that has anything even remotely similar to VirtualWisdom.  I
want to get to a situation where I sit with a customer and ask what they want.  If they say
they don’t know, we will say that we will monitor it for them, tell them how it’s performing,
and then ask them what service tier they would prefer. We have also shifted from reactive
to proactive management and we will be fixing issues before a customer even sees them
or, at the very least, let them know what is going on before they are impacted. The more
we use VirtualWisdom the more interesting it becomes; we can now optimise the whole
environment.” the Portfolio Manager concludes.

“The more we use

VirtualWisdom the more

interesting it becomes; we can

now optimise the whole

environment.”

Portfolio Manager

25 Metro Drive, Suite 400
San Jose, CA 95110

Sales Information
sales@virtualinstruments.com

Customer Support
support@virtualinstruments.com
www.virtualinstruments.com

©2012 Virtual Instruments. All rights
reserved. Features and
specifications are subject to change
without notice 03/12

WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM

