REGIONAL SUPERMARKET CHAIN  
CASE STUDY 

 

       

 

Leading US regional supermarket chain deploys 
VirtualWisdom to monitor its SAN to help ensure 
100% data availability 
VirtualWisdom chosen after a comprehensive, two year search for the 
most cost-effective SAN optimization solution 
Overview  

This award-winning large regional grocer is a privately-owned full service Supermarket 
Chain with over 150 retail outlets, and over 15,000 employees. 

To support the supply chain infrastructure, the Information Technology team must 
provide extremely high levels of application availability for payroll, pharmacy, financials 
and merchandising, including the very critical credit card and warehousing system.  
With data growth exceeding 20% per year and pressure to maintain profitability in a 
hyper-competitive market known for thin margins, the data storage team is expected to 
help contribute to the financial success of the company.  

IT Environment  

The IT staff supports over 200TB of online data in its main data center.  Storage is 
primarily IBM DS8000s, and secondarily, NetApp Filers.  Cisco MDS switches support 192 
SAN ports. VMware ESX hosts are widely deployed, though not yet supporting the primary 
SQL database and mail servers.   Like many IT departments, especially in the retail sector, 
this team is challenged with tight budgets and with getting more and more performance 
out of existing hardware assets and personnel.  The IT team’s success is measured by 
two metrics: keep the data available, and control costs to help contribute to the bottom 
line.     
Solution Evaluation  
The IT team was challenged with tight budgets and with getting maximum productivity 
from existing resources – hardware, software, and personnel.  To do this, IT knew it must 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

  

Challenges:  
• Pressure on IT staff to do 
more with existing CAPEX 
and OPEX budgets 

• Availability requirements of 

business critical applications 
dictate the need to predict 
problems before they 
escalate to application 
slowdowns or outages 

Solution:  

•  Virtual Instruments 

VirtualWisdom Jumpstart kit 

Customer Benefits:  

•  With VirtualWisdom, causes 
of potential application slow-
downs can be identified and 
corrective action provided 
before users are even aware 
of a problem 

•  Productivity of existing staff 
is maximized, to ensure that 
issues are quickly identified 
and remediated without 
wasted time 

“Most of the storage 

management products out 

there are operational in 

nature … covering resource 
and capacity, but they can’t 
tell you what’s happening 

with the SAN.”  

UNIX and Storage 
Administrator 

 

 

 

 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

REGIONAL SUPERMARKET CHAIN  
CASE STUDY 

 

       

  

be proactive; it had to avoid problems and anticipate issues before the application owners 
felt the pain.  The only way to do this without increasing the staff size was to find some 
way to proactively automate the monitoring and analysis of the SAN to ensure application 
availability.   

The company looked at several solutions, including the SAN management tools from their 
system, switch, and storage vendors, and settled on Virtual Instruments’ VirtualWisdom in 
early 2011.  The company wanted a solution that was: 

•  Capable of seeing physical layer issues in the SAN to help predict problems before 

they became serious 

• 

Flexible, so reporting and alerting could be tweaked to ensure that the staff would not 
be bombarded with meaningless data, but would not miss critical events  

•  Easily implemented in stages, allowing them to meter the degree of sophistication in 

their SAN management architecture, as resources allowed 

•  Simple to deploy.  Not heavyweight and expensive to buy and deploy, like many SRM 

solutions on the market 

Focused on performance and not just a resource utilization manager  

• 
In the final analysis, the IT team was able to demonstrate to management that with the 
availability of VirtualWisdom, some of the previous years’ inefficiencies and slowdowns 
could have been mitigated or eliminated. 

Role of VirtualWisdom – a proactive approach 

A proactive approach to system availability was required, and in early 2011, this IT team 
deployed the VirtualWisdom Jumpstart Kit, a lower cost entry-level solution from Virtual 
Instruments.   VirtualWisdom sees loss of sync, link resets, packet discards, aborts, code 
violations, SCSI reservation conflicts, and CRC errors and can send alarms for out-of-
bounds conditions.  Two examples of VirtualWisdom value: 

Multipath coverage 
VirtualWisdom reported that one link from the ESX was experiencing a Loss of Signal 
(LOS).   This was not being picked up by the Cisco or the ESX server monitoring tools, 
even though they would get ten or twelve LOS’s in a short period of time.  Further 
investigation uncovered a dead path.  Though this wasn’t causing a problem, if left 
uncovered, it could easily have resulted in an outage if left un-remediated.   

SCSI reservation conflicts 
SCSI reservation conflicts are a normal part of the SCSI protocol, and they are not 
actually errors. The SCSI protocol uses the reservation to allow exclusive access to a 
LUN.  It does this to prevent data corruption should there be competing devices for 
the same LUN.  But problems occur with excessive reservation conflicts, which is 
what VirtualWisdom uncovered.  Though this team has not yet implemented the 
VirtualWisdom ProbeVM, they were able to identify the physical hosts and ultimately, 
the VMs responsible, and remediated the issue before it became serious. 

Lessons Learned 

When asked what he would recommend to new VirtualWisdom customers, the UNIX and 
SAN Admin remarked that he was very pleased with the cost-effectiveness of the 
Jumpstart configuration.  He recommended considering it for a cost-effective way to get 
into the VirtualWisdom family. 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

“We started with the 

VirtualWisdom Jumpstart Kit.  

It was perfect … had 

everything we needed.” 

UNIX and Storage 
Administrator 

 

 
25 Metro Drive, Suite 400  
San Jose, CA 95110  
 
Sales Information  
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
 
Customer Support  
support@virtualinstruments.com  
www.virtualinstruments.com 
 
 
©2012 Virtual Instruments. All rights 
reserved. Features and specifications are 
subject to change without notice 01/12 

 WWW.VIRTUALINSTRUMENTS.COM 

