TELECOM

	 CLIENT

Global service provider

	 CHALLENGE

Enhance performance of 
critical databases 

	 SOLUTION

Vblock System 300

	 RESULTS

Total cost of ownership 
almost halved compared to 
nearest competitor

Processing time for critical 
app reduced from 12.67 
hours to just 2.03 hours

Administration reduced 
through integrated 
architecture

www.vce.com

VBLOCK DELIVERS PERFORMANCE AND 

VALUE IN ORACLE DATABASE MIGRATION 

BENCHMARK	DEMONSTRATES	VBLOCK	ADVANTAGE	OVER	 	
LEADING	COMPETITOR	

One of the world’s leading service providers faced a challenge when the servers for 
some of its core Oracle databases were nearing end-of-life. Seeking a replacement, 
the company benchmarked four leading server and storage combinations including 
Vblock™ Systems from VCE. 

VCE ran the database without changes to the application to demonstrate 
performance and rapid time to market. The Vblock System achieved a performance 
equivalent to 94 percent of that of the leading competitor. While the quote for the 
integrated architecture came in at around half the price of the competition, the 
Vblock System offered a level of flexibility and administrative simplicity that no 
competitor could match.

The	Challenge
This world-leading service provider relies heavily on Oracle-based network 
planning systems. Historically, these databases resided on Unix-based 
servers that, over time, were failing to deliver the performance needed by the 
business. With the servers reaching end-of-life, it was clear that the company 
needed to upgrade to a new infrastructure that could improve performance 
while delivering rapid return on investment. 

While the quote for the 
integrated architecture came 
in at around half the price of 
the competition, the	Vblock	
System	offered	a	level	of	
flexibility	and	administrative	
simplicity that no competitor 
could match.

The	Solution
The service provider used its own 
expertise to benchmark three technology 
options over a nine-month period. 
Of these, two were hybrid systems 
featuring more than one vendor, and 
one was an integrated platform whose 
vendor was given free rein to customize 
the databases to suit its technology. 
Because Vblock Systems brought into 
consideration later in the process, VCE 
decided to run the benchmark on a bare-
metal, four-socket blade server without 
the benefit of modifying the application 
to suit the hardware. 

For the test, VCE put together a Vblock 
System 300 featuring two Cisco Unified 
Computing System B440 Series Blade 
Servers, each with four 2.26GHz 10-core 
CPUs with 256GB of memory, combined 
with EMC VNX 7500 Series Unified 
Storage Systems. Switching and routing 
used Cisco Nexus 5000 and 6000 
Series Switches and Cisco ASR 9000 
Series Aggregation Services Routers. 
The Vblock System supported Oracle 
Database 11g Release 2 on a Red Hat 
Enterprise Linux 5.5 OS.

The	Results
All four systems tested by the 
customer achieved more than a 90 
percent improvement over its existing 
infrastructure.

In one critical benchmarking test the 
processing time for a critical application 
was running at 12.67 hours with the 
legacy system. The Vblock System 
reduced that to just 2.03 hours, without 
any database optimization, whereas 
the competitor system achieved 1.30 
hours with extensive prior database and 
platform optimization. In other words, 
a standard Vblock System installation 
achieved 94 percent of the performance 
improvement of the optimized  
competitor system.

During the selection, the company had 
been won over by the idea of having an 
integrated platform instead of a hybrid 
system because it simplified purchasing, 
contracts, and maintenance. That left 
only the Vblock System and one other 
competitor in the running. Of those two, 
VCE offered a significant number of 
added benefits including:

•  The customer’s Oracle databases could 
run straightaway on the Vblock System 
without any customization

•  The Vblock System could also host 

tiered web and desktop applications, 
delivered over Citrix, while the 
competitor’s infrastructure could only 
be used for databases

•  The Vblock System used in the 

benchmark had not been optimized 
so further performance enhancements 
could be gained with new CPUs easily 
integrated into the infrastructure

•  Unique Vblock System features, such 

as the ability to create Oracle backups 
without loading production servers, 
offered large savings on database 
administration time and effort

•  Built on industry-leading technologies 

from EMC, Cisco, and VMware, the 
Vblock System did not need the 
company to acquire new specialist 
expertise, avoiding a skills silo.

Perhaps the biggest advantage, however, 
was the return on investment offered 
by the Vblock System. VCE’s strategy of 
delivering factory integrated standardized 
infrastructure with lifecycle assurance 
means the Vblock System would cost 
significantly less to purchase,  deploy,  
and operate.

In the final analysis the service provider 
chose Vblock Systems because it could 
achieve 94 percent of the performance 
improvement of the leading competitor, 
with significant cost benefit. 

Copyright © 2013 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. VCE, VCE Vision and Vblock are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company LLC or its  
affiliates in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

www.vce.com

THE	WORLD’S	MOST	ADVANCED	CONVERGED	INFRASTRUCTURE

