TCO

eDuCation

	 Client

Tyler Independent School 
District, Tyler — Texas 

	 Challenge

Upgrade PC environment 
for close to 21,000 students, 
faculty and administrators  
in the midst of severe 
budget cuts 

	 Solution

•  Vblock Series 300 GX
•  VMware View VDI software

	 ReSultS

The Vblock platform enables 
$2.7 million in savings over 
five years, while providing 
students with a compellingly 
better computing experience. 

www.vce.com

VDI ON VBLOCK SAVES TYLER SCHOOL 

DISTRICT NEARLY $3 MILLION 

amiD	SeveRe	BuDget	Cut S,	impRoveD	it	effiCienC y	pReSeR veS	
eDuCation	funDing 	

The Tyler Independent School District was caught in the financial vice of having 
thousands of old computers, which were in desperate need of replacement, while 
losing significant state education funding. Teachers and students alike avoided using 
the machines because they were slow and often incapable of running modern software. 
Moreover, the difficulties and costs of maintaining thousands of PCs, sprinkled over 
nearly 30 different facilities and hundreds of square miles, were considerable. At the 
same time the district was poised to lose $10 million dollars due to major state budget 
cuts. The need for new machines was pressing, yet the district could no longer afford 
the traditional pc upgrade cycle. 

A Vblock™ System running Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) software from VMware 
offered the district a new path forward. Instead of the wholesale replacement of 
4,000 machines, the district could instead buy the Vblock system and use its existing 
computers as thin clients, saving $1 million in capital expenditures in the process. 
Performance and user experience were top priorities; on both metrics Tyler’s IT staff 
confirmed old computers running VDI on the Vblock system were indistinguishable 
from new, modern PCs. Tyler also gained the benefit of centralized administration  
of the districts’ infrastructure. Instead of laboriously traveling to fix and  
upgrade remote machines, through remote access system admins can now  
administer users’ desktop environments from anywhere, driving major  
operational savings. In all, the district expects to save $2.7 million  
dollars over 5 years, improve the student experience, and reinvest  
the savings in education. 

Difficult	financial	times		
Compel	Change	
The Tyler Texas Independent School 
District places a premium on using 
money effectively, out of responsibility 
to the children and to the taxpayer. This 
leads the district to be frugal with its 
equipment upgrades and spending.  
As a result, Tyler had a large stock  
of outdated computers, some up to  
10 years old. 

The Director of Technology at Tyler, 
John Orbaugh, commented: “Our 
desktops were aging. A lot of them 
were very old and not being used 
in the classroom. They were sitting 
there gathering dust, because nobody 
wanted to use Windows 98 or 2000.” 
Something had to be done, but in the 
context of a shrinking school district 
budget, simply buying replacement 
machines seemed impossible. Due to 
$5.4 billion in education budget cuts by 
the State of Texas, the district lost $10 
million in funding. 

John and his staff started looking into 
possible alternatives; they had several 
requirements:

1.  TCO — They needed a solution with a 

low total cost of ownership (TCO). 

2. Performance – John insisted that “we 
didn’t want our students to know the 
difference between a virtual desktop 
and a physical desktop.”

The district estimates total TCO 
benefits over 5 years of $2.7 million, 
including: 

•  Operational savings of $1.7 million by 
reducing the cost of maintaining the 
existing stock of computers, through 
centralized administration.

•  Capital expense savings of $1 million 

by purchasing the Vblock 300 
instead of 4,000 new PCs.

And customer satisfaction has 
increased:

•  Children and teachers now have 

highly responsive computers running 
the latest software. 

•  Users have access to school IT 

3. Compatibility with end user devices 

and applications — It had to run 
Windows 7, Office 2010 Pro,  
Adobe Creative Suite, streaming  
HD video, as well as a variety of 
educational software. 

resources whether they are in the 
classroom or at home. 

•  Valuable time has been freed for 

the IT staff enabling it to reduce the 
service backlog. As the number of 
children in the district expands, the 
district will be able to avoid adding 
additional IT headcount due to the 
increased efficiency of running VDI 
on the Vblock platform.

vblock	vDi	Solution

total	equipment	&	Software	Savings

$1,001,715

Reduced Staffing Expense For PCs Per Year

$900,000

Staffing Expense For Vblock Per Year

Other Expenses: Maintenance

total	operational	Savings	per	year

-$415,455

-$108,726

$336,267

total	operational	Savings	over	5	years

$1,681,335

total	Cost	of	ownership	(tCo)	Benefits

$2,683,050

Challenge

Results

The Tyler school district needed to 
upgrade its IT infrastructure to serve 
the needs of 18,400 students, and 
2,300 teachers and administrators. The 
district had a large stock of severely 
outdated computers, which were 
unusable for many tasks. Servicing 
these machines in the field was 
expensive, logistically complicated, and 
prone to delay. Cuts in the district’s 
budget made it impossible to upgrade 
the existing PCs and continue business 
as usual. The Tyler school district 
needed a solution that not only enabled 
it to modernize its infrastructure, but 
also did so at a much lower cost. 

Solution

The Tyler school district partnered 
with INX/Presidio and VCE to deploy 
a Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) 
solution built on Vblock systems. The 
solution included:

•  Vblock Series 300 GX

•  VMware View VDI software 

www.vce.com

the	Right	platform
The Tyler school district selected a 
Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) 
solution running on Vblock systems to 
modernize its desktop infrastructure. 
Working with Presidio, a VCE partner, 
the IT department chose a VCE VDI 
solution consisting of a Vblock 300 
GX system and VMware View software. 
Best-of-breed components guaranteed 
performance, while VMware’s View 
software enabled outdated hardware 
to run the district’s latest applications, 
thus reducing the need to acquire 
new terminals. Lower initial capital 
expenditure requirements, combined 
with the Vblock system’s ease of 
management promised lower TCO.

Of the alternatives that were evaluated, 
John “liked the VCE hardware 
architecture better. It was a big factor, 
because the performance is much 
better. The whole name of the game is 
speed. The computer has to respond to 
the user in a form and fashion that they 
are accustomed to.”

When the solution was introduced to 
the school board, the IT department 
set up a blind side-by-side challenge: a 
virtual desktop running on the Vblock 
system versus a current generation 
desktop. Could the board members 
determine which machine was which? 
They could not.

the	Benefits	
vblock	Systems	Bring	peace	of	mind

The benefits of the Vblock systems 
View solution were apparent from the 
moment the system arrived. Because 
of the standardized, pre-integrated 
nature of the Vblock platform “the 
deployment experience was amazing. 
We had a truck back up to our dock 
one day. In a few hours the systems 
were deployed, and we were ready to 
begin configuration.”

Management is also simpler — there is 
no longer a need to track, maintain and 
upgrade thousands of desktops. The 
entire environment can be managed 
from a single point of contact. The 
system administrator is able to log 
into the system from any remote 
location and quickly configure every 
facet of the VDI solution, through the 
administrator’s interface. John says, 
“I hear from my engineering group 
regularly about how happy they are 
with the Vblock, how easy it is to work 
with, and how well it works.”

The IT staff at Tyler appreciates the 
consolidated services and support 
that VCE offers. VCE manages the 
patches: “We get one periodic update, 
where VCE has pre-tested a patch, to 
make sure that it’s not going to have 
an adverse effect. One of the things 
we did not want to get into was a 
round of circular finger-pointing (when 
something goes wrong). Having all  
of the support in one location was a 
real plus for us.” 

major	Cost	Savings

After examining all the options, the 
Vblock platform was found to be the 
most cost effective solution for Tyler to 
reduce capital and operating expenses. 

Capital	expenses: The district’s original 
plan called for replacing their existing 
stock of PCs at a cost of $3.6 million. 
By purchasing the Vblock system’s  
VDI solution:

•  Tyler saved over $1 million in capital 
expenditures, even after accounting 
for hardware, software, maintenance 
and setup costs. 

•  Instead of purchasing new machines, 

Tyler uses its old machines as 
thin clients. These computers are 
now imbued with snappy modern 
performance, since they are serving as 
shells for programs running remotely. 

operating	expenses: Before the 
platform, the costs of supporting the 
existing PCs were considerable. The 
IT staff supported 4,000 student 
desktops and 1,500 laptops used by 
teachers and administrators spread 
over the 200 square miles of the 
district. The annual management and 
support costs of the desktops were 
$1 million. This included the costs of 
having to update and upgrade the 
machines laboriously one  
by one, as well as making a variety of 
onsite repairs, and time lost by the  
techs crisscrossing the district in the 
course of business.

•  Tyler has achieved operational 

savings of over $336,000 per year, or 
$1.7 million over five years.

•  The new Vblock system has reduced 

the costs of managing the desktop 
infrastructure by 90%. 

•  Entire batches of machines can get 

new software and upgrades remotely 
with relatively little effort. 

www.vce.com

“We	found	that	the	solution	
would	not	only	save	us	
money, but we could offer 
a better product to our 
students not just from the 
classroom, but from their 
homes as well. They could 
have the exact same desktop 
at home as they have in the 
classroom, without buying a 
new machine.” 
— John Orbaugh, Director 
of Technology at Tyler 
Independent School District

Students	get	Better	technology		
everywhere

Finally, John says that the students now 
get “the exact same toolset, whether they 
are at the house on a weekend or in the 
classroom. It is another way of pushing 
the technology closer to our students.” 
Even if a student’s family cannot afford 
a new PC, this system can provide them 
with a powerful computing experience. 

next	Steps
Tyler is running 120 virtual servers on 
7 blades dedicated almost exclusively 
to VDI. As the computing needs of the 
district grow, additional workloads will 
be virtualized on it. The system has 
more than lived up to user and staff 
expectations. John explains: “The bottom 
line is that it has performed quite well.  
We are very happy with it.” 

Learn more about how you can enjoy the 
benefits of pervasive virtualization and 
VDI sooner than you think with Vblock 
Infrastructure Platforms. 

Visit www.vce.com or contact your 
authorized VCE reseller.

for	more	information
To learn about the Tyler Independent 
School District, please go to:  
www.tylerisd.org

•  Fewer issues need to be resolved at the 

site of the individual PCs. Everything 
short of mechanical failure can be 
handled remotely. If a machine does 
break, replacing it is a matter of 
unplugging it and plugging in a thin 
client. The tech can then walk away. 

•  The time required to set up the 

computer labs every summer has been 
reduced by two hundred hours — 
thus helping to ensure that all of the 
computers are ready for use on day  
one of a new school year. 

•  These efficiency improvements will 

allow Tyler to avoid the cost of hiring 
additional staff going forward. 

In total, the school district will experience 
TCO benefits of $2.7 million over five years. 

Moving forward, as the existing stock  
of PCs ceases to work, they will be 
replaced by thin clients, which will cost 
$400 on average. 

These devices have no CPU, no moving 
parts, no fans or hard drives spinning. 
John thinks they should “last 10 to 12 
years.” This will add to the ongoing 
savings of the system. As the thin clients 
are put in place over time, they will 
drastically reduce power consumption 
costs. The typical thin client consumes 
6W of power, vs. 150 – 200W for PCs. 
As all of the 5,500 PCs and laptops are 
switched over to thin clients, it will save 
the district $221,000 per year in power 
costs: “we can save on the heat generated 
and the air conditioning too.” 

 
Copyright © 2012 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, LLC. and/or its  
affiliates in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

www.vce.com

the	WoRlD’S	moSt	aDvanCeD	ConveRgeD	infRa StRuCtuRe

