eDuCation

	 Client

University of San Diego, a 
Roman Catholic institution 
with a student population  
of 8100 students

	 Challenge

Standardize on a virtualized 
infrastructure to reduce 
IT complexity and meet 
growing demand for fast 
delivery of IT services 

	 Solution

Vblock Systems

	 ReSultS

Decreased deployment time 
for new systems, reduced 
operational costs and freed 
IT resources for innovation

www.vce.com

UNIVERSITY OF SAN DIEGO ADVANCES 

ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE WITH VBLOCK 

CalifoRnia	univeRSity	SpeeDS	Deployment	of	it	S yStemS	by	75 	
peRCent	while	ReDuCing	it	C oStS

The University of San Diego had undertaken a series of strategic initiatives 
to improve the experience of its 8100 students, consolidate administrative 
offices, and expand faculty and student recruiting. Recognizing the role of 
technology in these initiatives, the Roman Catholic university brought on 
board a new IT head to help support its strategic initiatives. 

As the university looked closely at its growing IT infrastructure, there 
were serious concerns that IT complexity was adding unnecessary cost 
and slowing delivery of critical services to support academic excellence. 
Students and faculty were increasingly dependent on websites and portals 
for information and collaboration. To support the needs of its varied 
constituents, IT needed a more flexible infrastructure. 

Now, Vblock™ Systems provide the solution for USD. The factory-integrated, 
converged infrastructure simplifies management, accelerates deployment of 
new services for constituents, and substantially reduces costs.

“vblock	Systems	have	
provided	a	strategic	way	
to	deploy	state-of-the-art	
technology that has reduced 
our costs, accelerated 
deployment of IT projects 
and delivered a great level 
of service to the academic 
community. For us, that’s a 
real competitive advantage.”  
— Christopher W. Wessells, 
Vice Provost and Chief 
Information Officer, 
University of San Diego

the	Challenge
In recent years, the University of San Diego 
(USD) has adopted multiple advanced 
information technologies to drive 
excellence in research and instruction, as 
well as higher administrative efficiency. 
Supporting these separate technologies 
became difficult and costly, and the IT 
team could not deploy new services 
quickly enough to meet the campus 
community’s high expectations.

the	Results
With the Vblock Systems, USD can 
quickly deploy infrastructure resources 
wherever they’re needed—whether 
it’s storage for a research application 
or additional computing capacity for 
the learning management system. At 
the same time, the IT organization has 
reduced costs and time involved in 
managing and supporting the more agile 
and flexible infrastructure. 

“Piecing together technologies on our 
own was extremely complex and time 
consuming. We needed a solution that 
brought together rich virtualization 
and cloud capabilities while freeing 
our administrators to focus more on 
innovation.” says Christopher W.  
Wessells, vice provost and chief 
information officer, USD.

the	Solution
Impressed with the VCE converged 
infrastructure, USD decided to 
standardize on the Vblock Systems. 
Applied Computer Solutions (ACS), 
the reseller and systems integrator, and 
VCE Professional Services worked with 
USD to deploy the Vblock System 300. 
VCE Professional Services and ACS also 
provided on-site support and knowledge 
transfer to USD’s IT staff.

All of USD’s hundreds of educational 
and business applications run on 
the Vblock Systems. These include: 
Microsoft Exchange, which supports 
3,500 mailboxes, Microsoft SharePoint 
collaboration, Oracle Hyperion enterprise 
business planning, Cognos enterprise 
reporting and a Blackboard learning 
management system.

To further optimize efficiency, USD relies 
on Vblock System technologies, including 
EMC Fully Automated Storage Tiering 
for Virtual Pools (FAST VP) and FAST 
Cache, as well as Flash, SAS, and near-line 
SAS drives comprising EMC VNX unified 
storage. For streamlined management, 
USD uses VMware vCenter Operations 
Management Suite and EMC Unified 
Infrastructure Manager (UIM).

USD’s IT organization has documented 
several improvements in agility and 
efficiency.

•  Purchasing a pre-integrated system 

reduced implementation costs by 50%

•  Standardizing on Vblock Systems 

reduced the time to roll out new 
systems by 75 percent, creating 
more time for engineers to work on 
innovative projects 

•  Virtualization and FAST VP improved 

resource utilization 

•  Redundant components and the 

flexibility to move virtual machines 
reduced downtime

•  Converged infrastructure transformed 

USD’s IT staff from a group primarily 
focused on maintenance and  
support to one adding value to  
the institution’s mission. 

USD also has valued VCE’s accountability 
for the entire platform and single-call 
support. Because cross-vendor finger-
pointing has been eliminated, USD 
has seen overall IT productivity and 
infrastructure reliability improve. With  
the efficiency gains enabled by an 
integrated, virtualized infrastructure and 
consolidated support model, USD IT  
has gained significantly more time to 
focus on innovative projects to promote 
the university’s long-term focus on 
academic excellence.

 
Copyright © 2013 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, LLC. and/or its  
affiliates in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

www.vce.com

the	woRlD’S	moSt	aDvanCeD	ConveRgeD	infRa StRuCtuRe

