Cisco Partner Solution Profile

ExEcutivE Summary

Partner Affiliation:
•  Cisco Developer Network
•  Cisco Strategic Partner

Associated Cisco Solution:
•  Cisco PCI Solution for Retail 2.0

Customer Benefits:
•  Cisco PCI Solution for Retail 2.0

–  Simplifies PCI compliance
–  Reduces risk with end-to-end blueprint 

for mandated security

–  Gives customers secure shopping 

 experiences 

•  VCE’s Virtualized Data Center for Retail

–  Shortens deployment times for virtual-

ization, with pre-integrated solutions
–  Maximizes flexibility with highly scal-

able, customizable offerings

–  Brings together industry-leading tech-
nologies in a collaborative solution with 
a simple support model

Targeted Industries:
•  Retail

Geographical Regions Served:
•  Global

Cisco PCI Solution for Retail 2.0:
VCE’s Virtualized Data Center for Retail
Partner Overview
Formed by Cisco and EMC with investments from VMware and Intel, the Virtual Comput-
ing Environment (VCE) Company aims to accelerate the adoption of converged infrastruc-
ture and cloud-based computing models that dramatically reduce IT costs and drive up 
productivity. Vblock™ Infrastructure Platforms and development environments are offered 
through an extensive partner network, allowing customers to focus on business innova-
tion instead of integrating, validating, and managing IT infrastructure.

Cisco Solution Description
The Cisco® PCI Solution for Retail 2.0 includes a set of validated designs that incorporate 
technology from Cisco and its partners. The solution helps retailers meet the requirements 
of the PCI Data Security Standard (PCI DSS). Cisco simplifies PCI compliance by provid-
ing the network and systems foundation for implementing comprehensive data security 
best practices and meeting today’s regulatory compliance requirements. Business ben-
efits of Cisco’s PCI solution include:

•  Simplifying PCI compliance

•  Establishing a strong foundation for security, with a network and systems infrastructure 

that helps retailers address the 12 PCI requirements

•  Securely and reliably protecting brand image and assets while mitigating the financial 

risk of noncompliance fines and penalties

•  Accelerating new business initiatives by eliminating the need to redesign the network 

to accommodate PCI security requirements

•  Building customer loyalty with a secure shopping experience

VCE

Partner Components in the Cisco Solution
VCE’s Vblock Infrastructure Platforms give retailers pre-integrated, 
best-in-class, secure data center infrastructure and rapidly 
deployable private cloud platforms tailored to meet PCI require-
ments. VCE platforms combine industry-leading technology: 
VMware virtualization; Cisco networking and compute resources; 
and EMC storage, security, and management technologies. The 
highly scalable end-to-end offerings are reliable, secure, and 
optimized for efficient power and cooling.

Vblock Infrastructure Platforms are jointly tested and supported 
by the contributing vendors to cost-effectively deliver the perfor-
mance and capacity retailers require for success. The security 
controls of the Vblock Infrastructure Platforms are validated by a 
Qualified Security Assessor (QSA) against PCI DSS requirements 
in typical retail environments. 

VCE helps retailers securely harness the power of virtualiza-
tion for agility in fast-paced markets. Vblock platforms uniquely 
blend cloud computing and secure next-generation converged 
infrastructure to enable faster PCI compliance, reliable business 
 continuity, and robust disaster recovery capabilities. Additional 
unique benefits include consumption and mobility manage-
ment, management uniformity, and a single model for services 
and  support.

Related Cisco Products
•   Routing: Cisco Integrated Services Routers (ISR, ISR G2), Cisco 

Aggregation Services Routers (ASR)

•   Switching: Cisco Catalyst® compact switches, Cisco Catalyst 

access switches, and Cisco Catalyst data center switches, Cisco 
Nexus® 1000V Series Switches, Cisco Nexus 5000 and 7000 
Series Switches, Cisco Application Control Engine (ACE),  
Cisco Multilayer Director Switch (MDS) with Storage Media 
Encryption module

•   Network Security: Cisco Adaptive Security Appliance (ASA), 

Cisco IronPort® Email Security Appliance, Cisco Network 
Admission Control (NAC) Appliance, Cisco AnyConnect™ VPN, 
Cisco Firewall Services Modules (FWSM), Cisco Intrusion 
Detection System Services Modules (IDSM), Cisco Intrusion 

Prevention System Appliances (IPS), Cisco Nexus Virtual Secu-
rity Gateway (VSG), Cisco IOS® Firewall, Cisco IOS IPS, Cisco 
Secure Access Control Server (ACS) 

•   Wireless: Cisco Aironet® Access Points, Cisco Wireless LAN 

Controllers, Cisco Mobility Services Engine with enhanced local 
mode (ELM), Cisco Adaptive Wireless IPS

•   Physical Security: Cisco Video Surveillance Operations 

Manager (VSOM), Cisco Video Surveillance IP Cameras, Cisco 
Physical Security Multiservices Platform (MSP), Cisco Physical 
Access Manager, Cisco Physical Access Gateways

•   Compute Systems and Storage: Cisco Unified Computing 

System™ (UCS), Cisco UCS Express

•   Management: Cisco Security Manager, Cisco Wireless Control 

System (WCS), CiscoWorks LAN Management Solution (LMS)
•   Voice: Cisco Unified Communications Manager, Cisco Unified 

Contact Center Enterprise, Cisco Unified Intelligent Contact 
Management, Cisco Unified Customer Voice Portal, Cisco 
 Unified IP Phones 

•   WAN Optimization: Cisco Wide Area Application Engine (WAE), 

Cisco Wide Area Application Services (WAAS)

Related Partner Information
•  Vblock platforms overview: http://www.vce.com/solutions/

vblock/

•  Cisco Unified Computing System: http://www.cisco.com/en/US/

partner/netsol/ns944/index.html

For More Information
VCE
www.vce.com
Imran Anwar 
Solutions Management & 
Marketing
(855) 823-1317
moreinfo@vce.com

 
Cisco
www.cisco.com
Rick Simon 
Retail Technology 
 Partner Manager 
(408) 527-5332
risimon@cisco.com

Americas Headquarters
Cisco Systems, Inc.
San Jose, CA 

Asia Pacific Headquarters
Cisco Systems (USA) Pte. Ltd.
Singapore

Europe Headquarters
Cisco Systems International BV Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands

Cisco has more than 200 offices worldwide. Addresses, phone numbers, and fax numbers are listed on the Cisco Website at www.cisco.com/go/offices.

©2011  Cisco  and/or  its  affiliates.  All  rights  reserved.  Cisco  and  the  Cisco  Logo  are  trademarks  of  Cisco  Systems,  Inc.  and/or  its  affiliates  in  the  U.S.  and  other 
countries.  A  listing  of  Cisco's  trademarks  can  be  found  at  www.cisco.com/go/trademarks.  Third  party  trademarks  mentioned  are  the  property  of  their  respective 
owners. The use of the word partner does not imply a partnership relationship between Cisco and any other company. (1005R)
DRMKT-17373  4/11

