P A R T N E R   S U C C E S S   S T O R Y  

 

 

Amdocs® Real-Time Charging, Powered by VMware  

 

 

 

 

For Amdocs, it’s important that our 
customers enjoy a flexible, scalable, 
high performance experience that can 
rapidly adjust to change in a real-time 
environment. In order to ensure this 
result, the Amdocs Convergent 
Charging solution is being powered by 
the VMware vSphere® virtualization 
and cloud computing platform. 

KEY HIGHLIGHTS  

Challenge  

To enable providers to run the Amdocs 
Convergent Charging solution, a real-time 
charging system, in a centrally-managed, 
virtualized environment. 

Solution  

The Amdocs Convergent Charging solution is 
powered by the VMware vSphere® 
virtualization and cloud computing platform.   

Results  

  Delivers a highly flexible, virtual software 
solution, with carrier-grade performance 
and low latency. 

  Scales quickly and efficiently to support 

massive real-time operations. 

  Reduces the total cost of ownership (TCO) 

with significant savings from reduced 
hardware, and third-party software. 

  Increases the return on investment (ROI) 

due to operational efficiencies, and 
increased flexibility though virtualization. 

  Reduces the time-to-market for new 

services and offerings. 

  As a foundation technology, VMware 

virtualization enables next gen solutions 
and network function virtualization.  

  VMware virtualization technology is cloud-
ready and it provides the prerequisite for 
creating private cloud solutions. 

 

 

Amdocs Delivers Flexible, Scalable, High 
Performance Virtualized Real-Time 
Charging, Powered by VMware 

 

“The industry is evolving towards network function virtualization as a way 

to help service providers decouple software workloads from hardware, to 

considerably improve cost-efficiencies and business agility. To ensure our 

customers can benefit from the latest advancements in this area, we 

certified our CES 9 product portfolio on VMware vSphere® and introduced 

the industry's first, virtualized network control, and now, real-time 

charging systems.” 

— Rebecca Prudhomme, Vice President, Product and Solutions Marketing, Amdocs  

 

With mobile technologies advancing at a furious pace, service providers 
need to have the flexibility to rapidly launch and monetize new services and 
offerings, while managing current operations efficiently. That is why 
Amdocs intends to deliver their Amdocs Convergent Charging solution, a 
real-time charging system, in a highly flexible, high performance, centrally-
managed VMware® virtualization environment. This success story 
describes how Amdocs initially deployed their Convergent Charging 
solution with VMware vSphere®, and the excellent results they achieved. 

Introduction  

For more than 30 years, Amdocs (http://www.amdocs.com/) has been a 
leading global provider of customer experience systems. Service providers 
rely on Amdocs to simplify the customer experience, harness the explosion 
in data, stay ahead with new services, and improve operational efficiency. 
Amdocs uniquely combines a market leading Business Support System 
(BSS), Operational Support System (OSS), and network control product 
portfolio, with value-driven professional services and managed services 
operations. With revenue of $3.2 billion in fiscal 2012, Amdocs and its 
20,000 employees serve customers in more than 60 countries. 

Amdocs Convergent Charging  

Amdocs Convergent Charging is Amdocs’ flagship product for delivering 
scalable, high performance, cost efficient, real-time charging in a single, 
integrated carrier-grade solution. It lays the foundation for an end-to-end, 
real-time event processing architecture for all types of charging, including 
prepaid, postpaid, online, and offline, with different lines of business, in a 
single convergent system.

      

 

 

CUSTOMER SUCCESS STORY /1  

 
 

P A R T N E R   S U C C E S S   S T O R Y  

 Amdocs® Real-Time Charging, Powered by VMware   

 

"We are proud to be involved in 

cutting-edge, communications 

industry advancements in carrier-

grade virtualization and cloud 

computing with key players like 

Amdocs. Virtualized BSS capabilities 

that can be scaled up and down 'on 

demand' can help service providers 

dramatically reduce hardware 

requirements." 

— Parag Patel, Vice President, Global Strategic 
Alliances, VMware  

 

PROFILE 

Industry 

Customer experience systems and services 

Corporate Headquarters 

Chesterfield, Missouri, U.S.A. 

Software 

Amdocs Convergent Charging, a real-time 
charging system 

 

VMWARE AT   WORK  

VMware vSphere 5.1 / ESXi 5.1  

  VMware vSphere® 5.1 Enterprise 

Edition™ 

  ESXi® 5 

VMware vCenter 

  VMware® vCenter Server™ 5 

DEPLOYMENT  ENVIRONMENT  

Primary Application 

Amdocs BSS and OSS software  

 

Everything – high-growth prepaid, postpaid, and convergent services – 
needs to be delivered in real-time, across all lines of business. Amdocs’ 
charging technology innovations, including its run-time environment, deliver 
a manifold increase in operational efficiency and performance by 
eliminating complexity in its real-time architecture, thereby enhancing 
business agility and accelerating the time-to-revenue.  

Amdocs Convergent Charging, Powered by VMware  

In order to accelerate decoupling software workloads from hardware, 
Amdocs planned to run their Convergent Charging solution in a flexible, 
high performance, highly available virtual environment. Amdocs chose 
VMware, a key partner, to power this solution. Amdocs decided that the 
VMware vSphere virtualization and cloud computing platform would provide 
a preferred, optimal environment to enable this solution. 

VMware vSphere increases the consolidation of physical servers, 
infrastructure, and the associated resources. Powering the Amdocs 
Convergent Charging solution using the VMware platform enabled rapid 
integration, the rapid allocation of computing resources, rapid access to 
those resources on demand, and increased utilization. By using VMware, 
Amdocs wanted to use less hardware and infrastructure, and increase 
energy efficiency, thereby lowering the total cost of ownership (TCO).  

The VMware platform facilitates operational efficiencies, including faster 
response times, immediate access to datacenter resources, extensive 
security (to safeguard virtual servers and protect personal information and 
data), and simplified management.  

Optimal, Agile Environment, Powered by VMware  

Amdocs wanted to test its Convergent Charging solution using the VMware 
vSphere 5.1 (ESXi) platform. Amdocs and VMware worked together at the 
Amdocs and VMware labs to develop the testing methodology and testing 
scenarios that would ensure the delivery of carrier-grade, virtualized real-
time charging. The Amdocs Convergent Charging solution used the x86 
Linux Redhat Enterprise operating system for this solution. 

The purpose of the testing initially was to prove the solution’s performance 
and high availability with the VMware vSphere virtualization platform as 
certification of Amdocs’ Convergent Charging 9.0 (as part of testing the 
entire Amdocs suite). The test objective was to prove the performance 
(online and offline) and stability of the Amdocs Convergent Charging 
solution, including the performance of Amdocs high availability 
mechanisms, under VMware management. 

The testing involved the Event Server, the heart of Amdocs Convergent 
Charging solution, and a key component of the event processing flow. Its 
in-house Amdocs InMemory Object Store (AIMOS) significantly reduces 
calls to the database and file-system, resulting in faster data access.  

The testing was conducted in a production-like environment, as shown 
below. 

      

 

 

CUSTOMER SUCCESS STORY /2  

 
 

P A R T N E R   S U C C E S S   S T O R Y  

 Amdocs® Real-Time Charging, Powered by VMware   

 

 

 

Flexible, Scalable, and Cost Efficient  

The testing results demonstrate that the Amdocs Convergent Charging 
solution running on the VMware platform delivers real-time, carrier-grade 
performance that can support millions of subscribers. All of the testing 
results passed well within the acceptable limits for the system size and 
load: 

  Online event processing stability was within the target latency KPI. 
  Offline load testing using Amdocs Convergent Charging and 

Acquisition, and formatting applications, showed offline throughput 
gained 10,000 charges per second without rerunning events. 

  The high availability target KPI was reached with a five millisecond 

latency and sub-second failover (switching between servers). 

The results showed no significant differences as compared to bare metal.  

Using VMware virtualization enables Amdocs to provide better scaling 
within high-end blade servers for improved utilization and growth with fewer 
limitations. By using the VMware virtualization infrastructure, the underlying 
hardware resources are separated from the application. There is minimal 
overhead for the hypervisor as compared to bare metal. 

VMware virtualization improves performance with scaling that delivers the 
appropriate resources where they are needed most. In addition, it gives 
Amdocs customers the ability to scale out quickly. It provides for greater 
flexibility and elasticity to extend and increase resources such as  
on-demand memory, and to expand resource capabilities. 

In addition, Amdocs Convergent Charging uses manual VMware vSphere® 
vMotion® for host maintenance. When a host needs to be put in 
maintenance mode, manual vMotion enables all virtual machines from that 
host to be migrated in an active state to an alternate host. This reduces the 
maintenance downtime from days to minutes.  

      

 

 

CUSTOMER SUCCESS STORY /3  

 

 

 

Amdocs Convergent Charging uses the VMware vSphere® Distributed 
Resource Scheduler™ (DRS) in manual and semi-automatic mode only. 
This avoids enabling the automatic vMotion of virtual machines in an 
active state. Amdocs Convergent Charging is a latency-sensitive 
application that requires a real-time response. An automatic vMotion on 
the Active Event server can result in adverse application response times.  

Based on the test results, Amdocs and VMware recommend using 
vMotion in automatic mode only when the transaction load is not latency 
sensitive in order to avoid timeouts. Amdocs non real-time applications 
can be configured with automatic vMotion and achieve the required 
performance. VMware is working to enhance the hypervisor to address 
low-latency vMotion use cases. 

By using VMware, a cluster can be easily replicated or moved from one 
environment to another. This includes use cases, such as moving virtual 
machines from staging to production, from one cluster to another within a 
data center, or deploying instances for scale out.  

This solution uses VMware® vCenter Server™ to provide centralized 
monitoring including aggregating all resident virtual machines and hosts. 
vCenter uses patented analytics and an integrated approach to 
dramatically simplify management tasks and to give the intelligence and 
visibility needed to proactively ensure health, efficiency, and compliance 
with IT policies. 

Moreover, the VMware platform allows service providers to enable a multi-
tenant environment. Providers can improve the Quality of Service (QoS) 
and offer service level agreements (SLAs) to tenants through instance 
isolation and VMware resource pools. In a virtualized environment, service 
providers can run mixed workloads on the same physical cluster.  

A VMware virtualized environment provides organizational boundaries to 
secure the data and isolate it in a multi-tenant environment. A cluster can 
be run in an isolated group of virtual machines, providing full data isolation 
and security, while sharing the same underlying physical hardware. 

Conclusion  

With the addition of virtualization to Amdocs Convergent Charging, Amdocs 
now offers the most advanced event-processing, real-time charging system 
available. Amdocs real-time charging provides the best-in-class charging 
performance on Linux-based software – and it enables the dynamic 
allocation of resources using an elastic, highly available cloud topology. 

As a foundation technology, Amdocs intends to use VMware virtualization 
to enable next gen solutions and network function virtualization. In addition, 
VMware virtualization technology is cloud-ready, and it is the prerequisite 
for moving to a private cloud or hosted managed services roadmap.  

 

      

 

 

CUSTOMER SUCCESS STORY /4  

© 2013 VMware Corporation. All rights reserved. This success story is for informational purposes only. VMWARE MAKES NO WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, IN THIS SUMMARY. 
VMware, the VMware logo, vSphere, and the vSphere logo are either registered trademarks or trademarks of VMware Corporation in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks 
are property of their respective owners. Document published November 2013.  

 PARTNER SUCCESS STORY  Amdocs® Real-Time Charging, Powered by VMware   