P A R T N E R   S U C C E S S   S T O R Y  

 

 

Deploy and Version Your Application in the Cloud  

 

 

 

 

P R O F I L E  

Perforce Optimizes Delivery of SaaS 
Offerings with VMware Technology 

 

Industry 

Software and technology services 

Corporate Headquarters 

Alameda, California 

Solution 

Version management software 

Web Site 
http://www.perforce.com/       

T H E   N UM B E R S  

  Perforce fast, scalable version 

management software has been chosen 
by more than 5,500 companies having 
more than 450,000 users. 

  Perforce has consistently won high 
rankings from industry analysts for: 
  Overall performance 
  Quality of support 
  Technology innovation 
  Customer satisfaction  

I N   B R I E F  

Objective  

To allow customers to use Perforce’s fast, 
reliable, and highly scalable version 
management products in a cloud setting. 

Solution  

The Perforce trial copy solution for their 
version management software is powered by 
the VMware® virtualization and cloud 
computing platform in a manner that 
provides for expansion and growth.  

Business Impact  

  Delivers a virtualized, centrally managed, 
and flexible version management software 
solution conveniently to a wide variety of 
users and industries. 

  Reduces the cost of an on-premises 

solution in a manner that increases energy 
efficiency and uses less hardware. 

“For Perforce, it’s important that our customers enjoy a fast, reliable, and 

scalable experience when working with our products. In fact, the OpSource™ 

100 percent availability guarantee was a key reason for their selection as our 

hosting provider. That guarantee is powered by VMware vSphere® and its 

vMotion® technology as the foundation of the OpSource solution. 

Choosing a VMware-based cloud provider that supports a REST API gave us 

the automation we needed to provide Perforce customers with trial 

environments at their convenience, rather than at ours.” 

— Tony Smith, European Technical Director, Perforce Software, Incorporated 

 

 

When you decide to move your application to a cloud implementation, you 
must address these challenges: 

  How can you rapidly deploy and configure your application in the 

cloud? 

  How will you know which version of the software is deployed and 

running?  

  How do you change the software or update it to the latest release of 

your application code with confidence?  

This success story describes how Perforce provided their version 
management software to customers using a Software-as-a-Service (Saas) 
solution that was delivered via a service provider’s implementation of the 
VMware virtualization and cloud computing platform.  

Introduction  

Perforce Software, a key VMware partner well known for its highly scalable 
version management products, wanted to allow customers to use a trial 
copy of their products in a cloud setting. Perforce successfully used a 
public cloud provider OpSource™, a Dimension Data company, and 
Perforce version management tools to create the service on a public cloud. 

This success story describes the architecture and tools that Perforce 
engineers constructed, and the best practices they used, to enable this 
solution. This information can prove useful to any engineering team that is 
working on their application in a cloud context. 

 

      

 

CUSTOMER SUCCESS STORY /1  

P A R T N E R   S U C C E S S   S T O R Y  

 

 
  Deploy and Version Your Application in the Cloud  

 

"Each group typically has its own unique 

requirements and development 

methodologies. Because it is flexible, and 

it is easily customizable using scripts, 

Perforce versioning software readily 

accommodates each group's development 

style. The system's open architecture has 

turned out to be a value for us." 

— National Instruments 

 

 

Perforce with VMware  

Perforce enterprise version management software is used by a wide 
variety of companies  from startups to many of the largest software and 
digital asset development companies worldwide. The company serves 
customers that are as widely diverse as hardware manufacturers, 
enterprise application developers, stock exchanges, animation studios, and 
computer games developers. The Perforce P4D Versioning Engine has 
been rigorously tested and validated on VMware vSphere for some time, 
and it is fully supported in a VMware environment. For more information, 
go to: http://www.vmware.com/resources/techresources/10291 

Cloud Requirements  

Perforce engineers needed to create an architecture that would provide a 
robust cloud solution. For example, Perforce did not want to get into the 
business of rebooting a customer’s implementation because a provider 
needed to administer a host server.  

A key decision for this implementation was that it reside on virtual 
machines that could be moved in a server maintenance scenario, without 
interrupting the application service. Virtual machines also allowed for the 
rapid provisioning of the service with the application for a new customer. It 
was essential that this process had to be a speedy one. 

In addition, the cloud provider had to supply a rich Application 
Programming Interface (API) that would allow Perforce engineers to build 
their own provisioning portal for instances of its software. Perforce did not 
want the customer to see the linkages to the cloud provider’s systems 
when requesting access to the application.  

Initial Steps 

At the outset of the project in early 2010, the initial step was to provide a 
“for-free” implementation. Perforce chose one of the main public cloud 
providers, and created the appropriate images on the public cloud to 
provide this service. Perforce asked a customer wanting to use its software 
on a trial basis to declare the region where the image was to be deployed. 
From there, the customer was allowed to directly access the service 
provider’s site. 

After 14 days of use, the image was deleted from the system. The original 
Perforce provisioning user interface was built using the cloud provider’s 
API. The next challenge for the Perforce engineering team was to enable a 
“for-revenue” solution that was available globally. 

Choice of Cloud Service Provider 

After the first trial period, Perforce investigated more than 20 different 
providers before deciding to utilize the public cloud provider, OpSource, for 
their cloud infrastructure. During this process, Perforce engineers found 
that cloud providers can be broadly organized into two groups: 

  Providers that serve an IT department that outsources part of its 

work to an outside party. 

  Providers that serve a developer community, but not necessarily one 

that is concerned with outsourcing IT functionality. 

      

 

CUSTOMER SUCCESS STORY /2  

P A R T N E R   S U C C E S S   S T O R Y  

 

 
  Deploy and Version Your Application in the Cloud  

 

The Perforce team wanted a provider that supported a rich API. It was 
essential to have a web interface for provisioning new instances on the 
provider’s infrastructure. For this reason, Perforce needed a cloud provider 
that could serve a developer community, as described above. They also 
needed production-level robustness and service level agreements (SLAs). 
After a thorough search, the team chose OpSource principally for their 
enterprise capabilities and support, as well as their API, as noted below. 

The Provisioning Workflow 

One key aspect of the new system design was that the image or virtual 
machine is provisioned in-place at the cloud provider’s site. This ensured 
that gigabytes of data making up the virtual machine contents were not 
copied across the network, causing delay. 

An outline of the provisioning workflow is described below: 

1.  A base virtual machine that has the Ubuntu® operating system 

loaded is extracted from the cloud provider’s library. 

2.  A Secure Shell (SSH) connection is made to the virtual machine and 

a port is forwarded over the encrypted connection. 

3.  The Perforce Client software is downloaded to the guest operating 

system within the virtual machine. 

4.  All required files to support the application, including the P4 Server 
itself, are synchronized from a remote Perforce P4 Server running 
elsewhere in the data center. 

5.  The connection to the virtual machine is closed. 

6.  The virtual machine is “shrink-wrapped” or converted into an Open 

Virtualization Format (OVF) image. 

7.  The OVF image can then be imported into a suitable vCenter setup 

and booted up on behalf of the customer. 

8.  The user is presented with a web page containing the necessary IP 

address, username, and password for connecting to the Perforce 
instance. 

Several of the steps above were enabled using the OpSource REST 
(REpresentational State Transfer) API, which is based on the VMware 
vCloud API. Overall, this process allowed the branch of the repository that 
contains the desired image of the Perforce software to be synchronized to 
the virtual machine that is made available to the user. In this case, about 
100 MB of data was customized on the new virtual machine image. 

When an update occurs later in time, the synchronization process can be 
repeated, or a new virtual machine can be provisioned quickly to serve the 
users’ needs. 

Using a Custom Enablement Tool 

In order to make the move to the public cloud easier, Perforce built a tool 
that automatically constructs virtual machines. The tool was originally 
developed for a major cloud provider and it now supports VMware and 
OpSource. OpSource application images are contained in VMware virtual 
machine images, but constructed remotely on OpSource infrastructure.   

      

 

CUSTOMER SUCCESS STORY /3  

P A R T N E R   S U C C E S S   S T O R Y  

 

 

Deploy and Version Your Application in the Cloud  

This tool can simultaneously generate 32-bit and 64-bit images for multiple 
geographical regions. The images contained the Perforce Server, the 
Perforce Proxy Server, and Perforce Commons.  

For the VMware images, the Perforce provisioning process used VMware’s 
API to drive VMware vCenter to start the base virtual machine. Then 
remote logon to the virtual machine using SSH is used to customize and 
populate the guest operating system with the application software, followed 
by an export of that virtual machine from vCenter to an OVF file set. 

Lessons Learned 

Through the year-long experience of deploying Perforce software in trial 
mode on virtual machines at OpSource facilities, the following lessons 
were learned: 

1.  Ensure that your cloud provider allows the virtual machines to be 

backed up and protected independent of the application being used. 
This helps to protect the application vendor’s brand if unforeseen 
events occur in one of the cloud provider’s data centers. 

2.  Every change to the users’ files on the application virtual machine is 
submitted to a Perforce repository, which provides a second level of 
protection. The user can revert to any version of their work, as 
needed. Similarly, the application vendor, in this case Perforce itself, 
can version control their trial software on the virtual machine. 

Conclusion 

Perforce succeeded in using the public cloud to enable both free trials and 
for-revenue usage of their P4 versioning software. This was accomplished  
by using OpSource cloud provider services. OpSource enabled Perforce to 
fulfill their SLA requirements.   

OpSource provided a rich cloud API for virtual machine and application 
provisioning that utilized VMware vSphere technology. The OpSource API 
enabled Perforce to build a transparent provisioning process for end-users. 
End-users did not have to interact with the cloud provider directly.  

The Perforce solution allowed the end-user to use version management on 
their work and have it backed up in a secure manner. Overall, the solution 
met Perforce’s critical needs for an application deployment in the cloud. 
The solution is now being utilized for production work by a number of 
Perforce customers in the application development space. 

IM P L EM E NTAT I O N   O V E RV I EW   

VMware Products and Technologies: 

  VMware vSphere® 4.1 Enterprise Plus Edition™ 

  VMware vSphere® 5 

  VMware® vCenter Server™ 4.1 

  VMware® vCenter Server™ 5 

  VMware® vCenter™ Site Recovery Manager™ 

  VMware® ESXi® 5 

Perforce Applications: 

Perforce Version Management 
software 

Perforce Services: 

  Consulting services 

  Managed services 

  Support services 

 

      

 

CUSTOMER SUCCESS STORY /4  

© 2013 VMware Corporation. All rights reserved. This success story is for informational purposes only. VMWARE MAKES NO WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, IN THIS SUMMARY. VMware, the 
VMware logo, vSphere, and the vSphere logo are either registered trademarks or trademarks of VMware Corporation in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks are property of their respective 
owners. Document published March 2012.  

