P A R T N E R   S U C C E S S   S T O R Y  

 

 

Alcatel-Lucent® Wireless Cloud Element, Powered by VMware  
  

 

   

 

  

The network enables the cloud, and 
communications service providers 
run the networks. That's a very 
powerful combination. The Alcatel-
Lucent® WCE solution, powered by 
VMware vSphere®, offers lower 
latency, better control of bandwidth, 
and the ability to provide a 
guaranteed quality of service for 
virtual RNCs. This enables service 
providers to adjust to rapid change.  

— Adolfo Hernandez, President, of Alcatel-
Lucent's Software, Services & Solutions Group 

KE Y   HI G HLIG HTS  

Challenge  

To enable communication service providers 
to run the Alcatel -Lucent® Wireless Cloud 
Element (WCE) using a centrally-managed, 
cloud computing architecture. 

Solution  
Alcatel-Lucent® Wireless Cloud Element 
solution that is powered by the VMware ® 
virtualization and cloud computing platform. 
For more information, contact an Alcatel -
Lucent sales representative. 

Highlights  
  Provides a unified cloud architecture that 

enables computing resources and 
infrastructure on demand. 

  Host s network function types on a range of 

industry standard, high-volume servers, 
switches, and storage. 

  Enables multiple, fully virtualized Radio 

Network Controllers (RNCs), and provides 
rapid scaling to quickly and efficiently 
support massive RNC operations. 

  Reduces the total cost of ownership (TCO) 

with significant savings from reduced 
hardware and infrastructure. 

  Increases the return on investment (ROI) 

due to operational efficiencies and 
increased flexibility though virtualization. 

  As a foundation technology, VMware 

virtualization enables next gen solutions 
and network function virtualization. 

Alcatel-Lucent® Wireless Cloud Element, 
Powered by VMware, Enables Flexible, 
Scalable, High Performance Virtual RNCs 

 

"Alcatel-Lucent® is truly leading with innovation in the Radio Network 

Controller market. Their Wireless Cloud Element Radio Network 

Controller (WCE RNC) is available now and it offers true network 

function virtualization on VMware. The Alcatel-Lucent WCE RNC is a key 

industry differentiator that offers a virtualized user plane, as well as 

control plane, that is cloud ready."  

Sanjay Katyal, VMware Vice President of the Global Strategic Alliances Organization  

 

Alcatel-Lucent® wants to deliver a “carrier cloud” to communications service 
providers  One that brings the benefits of the cloud to service provider 
networks and business operations  using secure, reliable, high-
performance communications networks. This includes a unified Wireless 
Cloud Element (WCE) that allows service providers to enable fully 
virtualized Radio Network Controllers (RNCs). This success story describes 
how Alcatel-Lucent developed their WCE solution, powered by the VMware 
vSphere®, and the excellent results they achieved in this effort. 

Introduction  

The mission of Alcatel-Lucent (http://www.alcatel-lucent.com/) is to realize 
the potential of a connected world. Alcatel-Lucent is at the forefront of 
global communications, providing products and innovations in IP and cloud 
networking, as well as ultra-broadband fixed and wireless access, to 
service providers and customers worldwide. Alcatel-Lucent is a recognized 
leader for innovation in making global communications more sustainable, 
affordable, and accessible. With a revenue of $14.45 billion in fiscal 2012, 
Alcatel-Lucent has over 72,000 employees worldwide. 

Alcatel-Lucent Wireless Cloud Element  

The public cloud model enables applications and data storage to be 
accessed on demand from data centers across the internet. However, 
some services require a level of quality and performance that the public 
cloud model is unable to provide.  

The Alcatel-Lucent® Wireless Cloud Element (WCE) solution delivers a 
highly flexible, scalable, high performance, cost efficient unified cloud 
computing architecture. 

      

 

CUSTOMER SUCCESS STORY /1  

 
 

P A R T N E R   S U C C E S S   S T O R Y  

 Alcatel-Lucent® Wireless Cloud Element, Powered by VMware   

 

“Network functions virtualization 
consolidates many network equipment 
types to industry standard high-
volume servers, switches, and storage 
using virtualization. These network 
equipment types can be moved to, or 
instantiated in, various network 
locations, without the need to install 
new equipment. The benefits include 
reduced CAPEX and OPEX, reduced 
time-to-market and improved ROI." 

— See http://www.etsi.org/technologies-

clusters/technologies/nfv  

 

The Alcatel-Lucent WCE solution provides the same cloud architecture that 
enables a data center to deliver virtually unlimited computing resources. It 
uses virtualization to decouple the one-to-one relationship between the 
physical network element and network functions, where multiple virtual 
RNCs can share a single data center.  

The WCE solution spans a wide variety of deployment models. These 
include single- or multi-technology (WCDMA/LTE) solutions, large 
configurations built by adding additional commodity hardware, and software 
deployment on top of an existing cloud. Virtualization of the controller 
applications and independence from the computing platform addresses the 
entire market, while controlling verification costs. 

The WCE solution delivers lower latency, better control of bandwidth, and 
the ability to provide a guaranteed quality of service (QoS). By doing so, 
the WCE solution allows service providers to meet the stringent 
performance demands of consumers and enterprises. The virtualization of 
network functions consolidates many network equipment types into a range 
of industry standard, high-volume servers, switches, and storage.  

PROFILE 

 

In addition, the WCE solution implements network functions in software to 
enable them to be moved or instantiated at various network locations, 
without requiring new equipment to be installed, and it maintains code 
compatibility.  

Industry 
Global communications sy stems /  services 

Corporate Headquarters 
3 av. Octave Gréard 

75007 Paris, France 

US Executiv e Offices 

600-700 Mountain Avenue 

Murray Hill, New Jersey, U.S.A. 

Solution 

Wireless Cloud Element (WCE)  

 

V M WARE   AT  WO RK  

VMw are vSphere 5.5 / ESXi 5.5  

  VMware vSphere® 5.5 Enterprise 

Edition ® 

  ESXi ® 5.5 

VMw are v Center 

  VMware ® vCenter Server® 5.5 

 

DE P LOY ME NT  E NV I RO NME NT 

Primary application 

Wireless Cloud Element (WCE) 

Alcatel-Lucent WCE, Powered by VMware  

Alcatel-Lucent chose VMware®, a key partner, to power WCE’s high 
performance cloud architecture using its VMware vSphere 5.5 virtualization 
and cloud computing platform, with the ESXi 5.5 hypervisor. Alcatel-Lucent 
picked VMware vSphere because it provides an optimal platform that is 
flexible, scalable, highly available, and secure. VMware vSphere is also 
best suited to increase the consolidation of network equipment types to 
industry standard, high volume servers and infrastructure. 

Optimal, Agile, Secure Cloud Architecture  

For the WCE solution, VMware’s cloud architecture provides for:  

  Multi-tenancy: W-CDMA and LTE applications share physical 

resources. Multi-tenancy provides for secure segregation of resources 
and data through instance isolation and VMware resource pools. 

  Horizontal scalability: Flexible configurations control the number of 

virtual machines used within a single tenant, taking advantage of large-
scale computing resources. 

  Elastic capacity: Provides the elasticity needed to extend and 
increase resources on demand, and to rapidly expand resource 
capabilities. 

  Power control: As capacity breathes throughout the day, hardware 

using operating system power control, can cycle up and down, thereby 
increasing energy efficiency. 

  Geographic redundancy: Ensures that a fault in one location does not 

disable the entire system, providing for reliability and availability. 

      

 

CUSTOMER SUCCESS STORY /2  

 
 

P A R T N E R   S U C C E S S   S T O R Y  

 Alcatel-Lucent® Wireless Cloud Element, Powered by VMware   

 

  Zero-downtime maintenance: Using the inherent capabilities of 

virtualization, shadow tenants can be created for fast enablement and 
rapid deployment of new software or fixes during maintenance and 
upgrade procedures.  

For the WCE solution, VMware vSphere 5.5 virtualization abstracts the 
physical hardware from the x86 Linux Redhat Enterprise guest operating 
systems. VMware vSphere provides for rapid integration, rapid allocation of 
computing resources, and rapid access to resources on demand. It 
facilitates operational efficiencies, including faster response times, 
immediate access to datacenter resources, extensive security to safeguard 
virtual servers, personal information, and data, and simplified management.  

The WCE solution uses VMware vSphere® Distributed Resource 
Scheduler™ (DRS) in semi-automatic mode for virtual machine assignment. 
DRS anti-affinity rules provide for high availability, and to ensure that active 
and standby virtual machines do not reside on the same physical host. 

VMware vSphere® High Availability® (HA) ensures that applications run 
reliably in the event of an unplanned hardware failure. When a host failure 
occurs and the active  virtual machine fails, VMware HA auto-restarts the 
active virtual machine on the first available host in the VMware cluster to 
standby mode, making the system redundant and highly available again in 
a few minutes.  

VMware® vCenter Server® provides for centralized monitoring, including 
aggregating all resident virtual machines and hosts. vCenter uses patented 
analytics and an integrated approach to dramatically simplify management 
tasks, such as to provide sufficient CPU and memory resources. vCenter 
proactively ensures health, efficiency, and compliance with IT policies.  

Scalable, High Performance, Reliable Virtual Infrastructure  

The Alcatel-Lucent WCE solution uses VMware infrastructure to enable 
virtual networking elements that are similar to those used in the physical 
environment, but with some advanced capabilities. 

The VMware infrastructure used in the WCE solution includes: 

  Virtual network interface card (vNIC). Provides support for at least 8 
VMXNET3  vNICs per virtual machine. Each virtual machine has its own 
vNIC.  

  Virtual Distributed Switch (vDS). A vSphere vDS acts as a single 

virtual switch across all associated hosts that is managed by 
administrators, thereby ensuring a consistent network configuration.  

  VLANs. Provides support to enable virtual networks to join physical 

VLANs or to support QoS policies. VLAN tagging on the source or 
destination IP is based on the vNICs. 

  LBT load balancing. LBT is an advanced vDS feature that provides for 

dynamic balancing of traffic between port groups. 

  Central Management. Network policies on vDS get pushed down to 

the host automatically when the host gets added to the distributed 
switch. 

  

      

 

CUSTOMER SUCCESS STORY /3  

 

 

 

The Results  WCE with Virtual RNC = Carrier Grade Performance  

Alcatel-Lucent and VMware worked together to test the WCE solution 
running the virtual RNC. The initial results have been very encouraging. 
They demonstrate that the Alcatel-Lucent WCE running on the VMware 
platform delivers excellent carrier-grade performance. All of the testing 
results passed well within acceptable limits. The key results include: 

  Significantly, the virtual RNC surpassed the capacity that any Alcatel-
Lucent RNC has ever achieved. The load level greatly exceeded the 
capacity of the traffic generators and the test infrastructure had to be 
expanded in order to continue scaling. 

  The  virtual RNC was able to immediately take advantage of the next 

generation of hardware, leverage the  virtualization benefits provided by 
the VMware ESXi hypervisor, and realize a greater than 50 percent 
capacity gain with no software changes. 

  Regression tests on all of the standard traffic profiles show excellent 
key performance indicators (KPIs) at rates that greatly exceeded the 
capabilities of the currently deployed RNC.  

  The  virtual RNC was able to span multiple shelves of computing 

equipment on the first attempt, demonstrating the strength of 
virtualization to decouple applications from the physical environment.  

  The multi-shelf test also demonstrated the decoupling of the 

virtualization environment itself, as two versions of the VMware ESXi 
hypervisor where used simultaneously. This type of situation may be 
present during an infrastructure upgrade. 

  The shadow upgrade procedure has proven to be remarkably powerful 

for the virtual RNC. Packet data connections were demonstrated to 
automatically reconnect after the upgrade. The cell site activation 
occurred so rapidly after shadow upgrade that the data users were 
unaware of the magnitude of change in the network. 

  Elastic growth was tested within a virtual RNC under load by adding UE 
Management Unit nodes (UMUs) to a virtual RNC already running twice 
the maximum capacity of the 9370 RNC. Traffic was immediately 
dispatched to the UMUs. Within 20 to 30 seconds, the traffic in the 
virtual RNC was evenly distributed across all of the UMUs. 

The test results show that the Alcatel-Lucent WCE solution offers one of 
the most advanced systems available. Alcatel-Lucent WCE provides for the 
dynamic allocation of resources using an elastic, highly available cloud 
architecture, powered by VMware. It also delivers best-in-class 
performance when running on Linux-based software 

      

 

CUSTOMER SUCCESS STORY /4  

© 2013 VMware Corporation. All rights reserved. This success story is for informational purposes only. VMWARE MAKES NO WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, IN THIS SUMMARY. 
VMware, the VMware logo, vSphere, and the  vSphere logo are either registered trademarks or trademarks of VMware Corporation in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks 
are property of their respective owners. Document published November 2013.  

 PARTNER SUCCESS STORY  Alcatel-Lucent® Wireless Cloud Element, Powered by VMware   