Cloud	SeR viCe	pRovideR

	 Client

Xerox

	 Challenge

Entering new markets  
for cloud services

Differentiating service 
offerings

Providing rapid on-boarding 
for new clients 

	 Solution

Vblock Systems

	 ReSultS

Standardized platform-
facilitated venture into  
Asia markets

Rolled out cloud services  
to new clients in less  
than a month

Developed differentiated 
services complementing 
Vblock Systems capabilities

www.vce.com

XEROX BUSINESS SERVICES BUILDS 

CUSTOMER CLOUD ON VBLOCK SYSTEMS 

XeRo X	BuSineSS	SeR viCeS,	iS	paRt	of	XeRo X’S	$23	Billion	gloBal 	
enteRpRiSe	with	140,000	employeeS	that	SeR ve	Client S	in	160 	
CountRieS.	Ba Sed	in	d allaS,	XeRo X	BuSineSS	SeR viCeS	pRovideS	
fleXiBle	it	SeR viCeS	to	foRtune	1000	C ompanieS,	goveRnment 	
oRganizationS	and	the	SmB	maRket.

Xerox Business Services provides IT services to enterprise clients whose security, 
compliance and control requirements can be very demanding. As the market for 
cloud services expanded, Xerox Business Services saw an opportunity to develop 
new services and enter new markets. To do this, they needed an infrastructure that 
offered the performance that clients would need and the ease of management they 
would need to quickly on-board new applications. 

Standardizing on Vblock™ Systems from VCE proved to be the right 
solution. With Vblock Systems, Xerox Business Services can move clients to 
the cloud faster. Because Vblock Systems are built to support a variety of 
mixed workload environments, IT can rely on the converged infrastructure 
to support a wide range of client requirements. Unified provisioning and 
monitoring mean that Xerox Business Services can bring on new clients 
quickly with relatively little additional staff resources. And Xerox Business 
Services can build on the basic Vblock Systems’ capability to differentiate 
its service offerings.

“Given that Vblock 
products are prepackaged, 
pre-engineered, and pre-
integrated, we	have	more	
time	to	focus	on	the	value-
added	nature	of	cloud.”  
— Steve Houser, Xerox 
Business Services chief 
technology officer of cloud 
services and engineering

the	Challenge
Based in Dallas, Xerox Business Services 
provides business process outsourcing 
(BPO) and IT solutions to commercial 
and government clients. It is part of 
Xerox’s $22 billion global enterprise 
encompassing 140,000 employees who 
serve clients in 160 countries. Xerox 
Business Services leverages best practices 
in BPO and enterprise IT to help an 
increasing number of clients meet their 
business challenges with cloud services. 

To be successful in the cloud market, 
Xerox Business Services needed the 
ability to differentiate its services 
and respond quickly to new business 
opportunities. The old model of 
integrating industry-leading technology 
in-house was slowing the process. 

“Xerox Business Services had been working 
with Cisco, EMC and VMware for a long 
time,” said Steve Houser, Xerox Business 
Services chief technology officer of cloud 
services and engineering. “But being able 
to build on pre-integrated Vblock Systems 
enabled us to more rapidly address the 
booming and global cloud market.” 

Solution	
Xerox Business Services uses Vblock 
Systems to drive the operation of three 
cloud nodes that are in production: two in 
the U.S. and one in Asia Pacific. Impressed 
with the initial success, the company has 
plans to add another three to four cloud 
nodes built on Vblock Systems. 

Results	
agility	

Vblock Systems provide Xerox 
Business Services and their clients with 
significantly improved business agility. 
Houser tells the story of a client in Asia 
who wanted to use cloud services: 

“We engaged VCE, quickly determined 
what size Vblock system was appropriate, 
and had the solution deployed in less than 
a week. We were able to deliver that node 
with very little manpower on our side,”  
he said. “Then we opened up marketing 
to our other clients in the region. 

We now have three clients leveraging 
that one Vblock system, and we’re easily 
expanding that infrastructure to meet 
client demand.

“Not only can a business application 
owner quickly spin up multiple virtual 
machines for a particular application, they 
can choose to create test environments 
that are needed for only a week. And we 
have seen cost savings for our client base 
in moving from traditional IT outsourcing 
to a cloud business model.”

differentiation

Enterprise clients have to be diligent 
about security, compliance and control 
when they use cloud services. Xerox 
Business Services is able to address those 
concerns and differentiate their offerings. 
According to Houser, “We get a head 
start by building on top of the security 
capabilities that are foundational aspects 
of Vblock Systems.”

VCE helps in the compliance arena as well. 
“VCE does the work that helps us with the 
compliance and change management our 
clients require,” says Hemanth Jayaraman, 
enterprise architect at Xerox Business 
Services. “VCE takes responsibility for 
integrating the products from each of 
their parent companies. We benefit from 
an integrated roadmap that relieves our 
IT shop from doing the product testing, 
integration and patching.”

growth

As Xerox Business Services looks ahead 
to new business opportunities, they’re 
confident that they made the right 
infrastructure decision. 

“We’re able to drop a Vblock system 
in, layer in our cloud automation 
components and bring a client up in less 
than a month,” Houser explains. “We’re 
working to develop vertical industry 
offerings for healthcare and other 
markets, knowing we can address the 
full cycle from IaaS and SaaS to business 
process utility.”

 
Copyright © 2012 VCE Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, LLC. and/or its  
affiliates in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners.

www.vce.com

the	woRld’S	moSt	advanCed	ConveRged	infRaStRuCtuRe

