 

 

 

 

 

www.vce.com 

BEYOND CONVERGED INFRASTRUCTURE: 
DELIVERING A PRODUCTIVE CLOUD 
EXPERIENCE WITH INTEGRATED SOLUTIONS  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All Rights Reserved. 

 

 

 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All Rights Reserved. 

1 

 

 

Copyright © 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All Rights Reserved. 

VCE believes the information in this publication is accurate as of its publication date. The information is subject to 
change without notice. 

THE INFORMATION IN THIS PUBLICATION IS PROVIDED "AS IS." VCE MAKES NO 
REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND WITH RESPECT TO THE INFORMATION IN 
THIS PUBLICATION, AND SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIMS IMPLIED WARRANTIES OR 
MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All Rights Reserved. 

  

 

2 

 

 

 

Contents 
 

Popularity of Private Clouds Continues to Rise ...................................................................... 4	  
Diverse Cloud Management Platforms ...................................................................................... 5	  
Creating a Productive Private Cloud ........................................................................................ 6	  
Gaining Greater Insight into the Journey ................................................................................... 6	  
The Need for Effective Cloud Management ........................................................................... 7	  
Building Better Managed Private Clouds ................................................................................. 8	  
VCE™ Integrated Solutions for Cloud Management ............................................................... 9	  
Designed for How Businesses Deploy Cloud Computing .......................................................... 9	  
Going Beyond Out-of-the-Box Automation .............................................................................. 10	  
Conclusion ................................................................................................................................ 11	  
Next Steps ............................................................................................................................... 12	  

	  

  

 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All Rights Reserved. 

  

3 

 

 

Popularity of Private Clouds Continues to Rise 

Private cloud computing is soaring. The majority of enterprise-class and midmarket organizations in 
North America already have a private cloud infrastructure in place, or are planning to deploy one in the 
near future.1 Similar numbers of enterprises globally have implemented private cloud solutions. 

Many IT organizations with private clouds have patterned their internal services after the successful 
public cloud offerings of Amazon Web Services (AWS). IT organizations want to be able to offer the 
agility, cost savings, and broad application scalability of AWS—together with the advantages of 
increased security and control offered by private clouds. They are designing solutions that can be 
used to quickly and efficiently deploy and provision servers to address fleeting business opportunities, 
while containing costs. 

Organizations are becoming increasingly knowledgeable about which applications will run well in a 
public, AWS environment and which would be better suited for a private cloud environment in-house. 
This has not only contributed to the growing number of private clouds, but has also led to more 
organizations embracing hybrid cloud strategies. 

Fueling this trend to private or hybrid clouds are today’s integrated computing platforms. A recent 
survey found that one-third of the respondents had already deployed integrated computing platforms, 
with another 44 percent expressing interest.2 Worth noting, organizations with a private cloud 
infrastructure are nearly twice as likely to be using an integrated computing platform as those 
organizations that have not yet deployed private clouds. 

Organizations with private cloud infrastructures have identified a wide range of benefits, including 

  Elasticity—Can quickly scale the infrastructure up or down based on actual demand for IT 

resources. 

  Resource pooling—Able to pool these IT resources for greater efficiency. 
  Universal network access—Can offer business units seamless connectivity to public cloud 

resources, when needed. 

  On-demand self-service—Supports rapid, direct access to new virtual machines (VMs). 
  Measured service—Allows IT organization to apply usage-based tracking and billing. 

                                                        

 

 

 

1 Mark Bowker, Bill Lundell, and Jennifer Gahm, Research Report: Trends in Private Cloud Infrastructure, The Enterprise Strategy 
Group, April 2014. 
2 Mark Bowker, Bill Lundell, and Jennifer Gahm, Research Report: Trends in Private Cloud Infrastructure, The Enterprise Strategy 
Group, April 2014. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All Rights Reserved. 

  

 

4 

 

 

Diverse Cloud Management Platforms 

While the use of private cloud computing is growing rapidly, many organizations are finding it complex 
to manage their cloud infrastructures. There are a wide variety of what Gartner has labeled cloud 
management platforms (CMPs) to choose from—Cisco, VMware, BMC, CA Technologies, and even 
IBM and HP offer solutions. The leading platforms are powerful and comprehensive, providing 
enterprises with a wide range of tools for efficiently provisioning, orchestrating, and supporting private 
cloud implementations in a way that delivers significant benefits to the business. 

But for smaller organizations or those with fewer needs, these broad-based toolsets can present 
challenges and risks in terms of cost, complexity, and deployment delays. In addition, to keep pace 
with industry requirements, the tools’ feature sets must be updated regularly, which can result in 
higher training costs and the very real risk that many of the tools’ capabilities will go unused or will 
become out of specification before you’re ready to use them. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All Rights Reserved. 

  

 

5 

 

 

Creating a Productive Private Cloud 

For many organizations, the biggest question about private cloud implementations is what IT 
architecture they should choose. The reality is that successful enterprises commonly spend as much 
time thinking about their “financial architecture” as their technology architecture. How does the 
organization get work done? How are IT budgets handled—in silos, or on an organization-wide basis? 
Addressing these so-called “cloudonomic” 3 issues up front will lead to much smoother and shorter 
cloud implementations. 

Another misconception is that a private cloud is at its core a way to achieve a software-defined data 
center. Organizations that buy into this buzzy concept with all of its attractions and ramifications might 
be tempted to think that everything required for a cloud-computing infrastructure can be done with 
software. 

While theoretically this may be true, in most cases, organizations are going to be dealing with a wide 
array of devices, components, and other resources; cascading firmware and hardware upgrades and 
software release dates; and other complexities that often lead to a chaotic, tangled mess. Under these 
circumstances, it’s difficult to find any purely software-defined platform that can help IT teams deliver 
an attractive ROI. 

That’s why so many organizations in recent years have turned to VCE and the advanced converged 
infrastructure of its pre-engineered, pre-integrated, factory-built Vblock® Systems for their private 
cloud implementations. 

Gaining Greater Insight into the Journey 

To better understand the journey organizations make to successful private cloud computing, VCE 
commissioned the Topline Strategy Group to conduct a survey. VCE wanted greater insight into the 
scope of the market and the needs of organizations as they sought to develop and deploy private 
clouds. To gather this information, Topline conducted an online survey of organizations with 1,000 
employees or more. The surveys were targeted to CIOs, VPs, directors, and managers with 
knowledge of their organization’s private cloud implementation or plans. 

From the more than 160 respondents with direct cloud responsibilities, 10 percent were selected for 
in-depth interviews. Among the industries represented were government, financial services, 
hospitality, media, logistics, manufacturing, construction, high technology, technology services, and 
business services. 

Among the survey’s key findings were 

                                                        

 

 

 

3 Joe Weinman, Cloudonomics: The Business Value of Cloud Computing, Wiley, September 4, 2012. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All Rights Reserved. 

  

 

6 

 

 

  While public cloud has a precise definition, the term “private cloud” possesses a much more fluid 

one that may be used to refer to anything along a continuum of capabilities—from systems 
running highly virtualized, mixed workloads to true, full-featured, in-house cloud implementations. 

  Successful companies typically start with a very basic, yet functional, private cloud and add 

capabilities as needed over time. This “start small” approach is underscored by the fact that only 
19 percent of private clouds provide the full range of public cloud functionality associated with 
solutions such as AWS, which many IT managers set out to emulate. Other research, conducted 
in several Gartner studies, reinforces this. The ideal pilot offering should be almost plug-and-play, 
self-contained, and modular to support efficient growth while not putting existing production at risk. 
  Most private clouds are being deployed for production or mixed workloads, not primarily for testing 

and development (test/dev). 

  As noted above, business process and organizational issues—not technical issues—act as the 

primary barrier to efficiently rolling out advanced private cloud capabilities. 

The Need for Effective Cloud Management 

The right CMP can significantly enhance the effectiveness of private cloud implementations and help 
meet business needs by providing exceptional agility. According to Gartner, organizations are 
leveraging the automation capabilities of CMPs to address the demand for greater flexibility in 
delivering infrastructure and application services rapidly and efficiently while reducing costs. 

But Gartner warns, “For most organizations, going beyond out-of-the-box automation capabilities 
provided by cloud management platforms is not recommended.” 4  What is clearly needed is a 
simpler, fully integrated cloud management and orchestration solution that enables rapid provisioning 
of cloud environments, without the level of complexity of most tools today. 

In addition, these CMPs should be tailored to support test/dev applications right from the start, not just 
production or mixed workloads. 

                                                        

 

 

 

4 Alessandro Perilli, Climbing the Cloud Orchestration Curve, Gartner Technical Professional Advice, January 13, 2014. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All Rights Reserved. 

  

 

7 

 

 

Building Better Managed Private Clouds 

Today, there are relatively few large organizations that are looking to build a full-service, private cloud 
portal where they can provide application development groups or other business units complete self-
service access. Most organizations with private clouds are primarily interested in faster, more efficient 
VM provisioning, i.e. VM-as-a-service (VMaaS). In these implementations, data center managers may 
refer to it as cloud computing, but the chief objective is to make their organizations more productive 
and be able to respond quickly with VMs on demand. 

These organizations are looking for lower-cost, prepackaged, quick-to-deploy, and easy-to-use CMPs 
that meet their current requirements while providing a path to add more robust management and 
orchestration capabilities over time. Further, Gartner recommends, “To reduce the need for custom 
automation and rapidly return on the investment, organizations should first focus their cloud 
environments on enabling agile development and testing while staying close to commoditized 
capabilities.” 5 

                                                        

 

 

 

5 Alessandro Perilli, Climbing the Cloud Orchestration Curve, Gartner Technical Professional Advice, January 13, 2014. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All Rights Reserved. 

  

 

8 

 

 

VCETM Integrated Solutions for Cloud Management 

To address these requirements, VCE is introducing VCE™ Integrated Solutions for Cloud 
Management, a first-of-its-kind approach to simplified cloud management and orchestration. These 
integrated solutions extend the core VCE value propositions—simplicity, efficiency, agility, faster time-
to-value, and lower risk—to deliver a cloud management experience that’s unavailable elsewhere. 
The solutions incorporate 

  Totally integrated approach—Fully engineering and building Vblock Systems in the factory for 

virtualized applications and cloud computing, and then adding a cloud management and 
orchestration layer that has been integrated with and tested on the Vblock Systems platform. 
  Release Validation—Ongoing validation and assurance that all components and software will 

work together, based on Vblock System testing and verification. 

  VCE Vision™ Intelligent Operations—Enabling and simplifying cloud operations by dynamically 

providing data from system health checks, event monitoring, compliance verification, and more to 
management toolsets. 

  On-site Deployment—Offering on-site deployment and other value-added service options that can 

be tailored to the organization’s IT environment and requirements. 

  Single-call support—Delivering VCE™ Support that helps organizations maximize the value of 

their investment through a single point of accountability. 

Designed for How Businesses Deploy Cloud Computing 

VCE Integrated Solutions for Cloud Management have been designed to address the way 
organizations are looking to implement cloud services. By offering pre-integrated, pre-tested solutions, 
organizations can rapidly deploy version 1.0 of their private cloud and enjoy a time-to-value of hours 
or days rather than weeks or months—making these solutions especially well-suited to the needs of 
smaller to midmarket organizations. 

In addition, a key strength of Vblock Systems has been their predictability due to the use of 
standardized components and technologies with element managers and software versions that are 
fully tested and verified in advance. Including cloud automation tools in this process ensures that the 
tools will perform as expected and offer value rather than be underutilized due to their complexity or 
applicability. 

Among the essential features of the integrated cloud management solutions are 

  Choose today from VMware or Cisco-based software stacks. 
  Support a self-service portal or catalog of cloud services. 
  Streamline infrastructure management, VM provisioning, and associated orchestration, using 

predefined workflows. 

  Take advantage of full showback capabilities that give IT business units and management a clear 

analysis of costs and usage, without mandating chargebacks. 

  Ensure that the full VCE experience—including VCE Vision™ software, release validation, and 
VCE Support—is integrated into the cloud management platform, resulting in welcome peace of 
mind. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All Rights Reserved. 

  

 

9 

 

 

Going Beyond Out-of-the-Box Automation 

VCE is well aware that VCE Integrated Solutions for Cloud Management will not meet every need for 
organizations of different sizes and descriptions. These integrated solutions have been created 
specifically to provide low-risk, low-maintenance, highly reliable cloud computing entry points—while 
offering a clear path to more advanced cloud management features and capabilities. Organizations 
can easily take the next steps by calling upon VCE or partner-led cloud service teams to build in more 
advanced cloud features or better align the solution to fit specific business or operational processes. 

The integrated solutions software components support the implementation of capabilities that can be 
added whenever an organization’s needs or wants dictate, including 

  Policy-driven provisioning, orchestration, and automation to quickly and efficiently address 

business opportunities and manage in a hybrid cloud environment with applications and 
resources moving among private and public clouds.  

  A distributed cloud management stack and disaster recovery (DR) solutions to improve availability 

and recoverability in a cloud environment. 

  The ability to scale up or out of the cloud management stack with the addition of subsequent 

Vblock Systems. 

  Secure multi-tenancy that offers each user or application its own exclusive and fully safeguarded 

virtualized computing environment. 

  Chargebacks that allow business units to be accurately billed for the use of IT computing power 

and resources. 

  Configuration Management Databases (CMDBs) that conveniently and accurately store relevant 

configuration records for IT resources throughout their lifecycle. 

  Advanced security that’s required for larger cloud computing environments. 
  Innovative capabilities for public cloud integration required for the growing number of hybrid cloud 

solutions. 

  Easy integration into workflow or ticketing systems. 
  Effective kickouts to manual provisioning, when desired. 
  Automated de-provisioning as applications and VMs are no longer required. 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All Rights Reserved. 

  

 

10 

 

 

Conclusion 

Driven by the broad acceptance of server virtualization, private cloud infrastructures are rising 
worldwide. Midmarket to large enterprises and service providers have embraced private and hybrid 
clouds to efficiently pool technology resources, scale to meet the actual demand for computing 
services, offer fast and often self-service access to VMs, and set the groundwork for measured 
service. The result is vastly improved business agility at a lower cost. 

Accelerating this trend is the surge in the use of integrated platforms of compute, networking, and 
storage technologies. IDC has projected an annual growth rate in excess of 50 percent in the 
converged systems market, with converged systems expected to account for more than one-third of 
enterprise cloud deployments in 2016. 6  

VCE—with its best-of-breed components from Cisco, EMC, and VMware—has led in the creation of 
the industry-best advanced converged infrastructure that is ideal for public, private, and hybrid cloud 
implementations. VCE Vblock Systems are built on five solid pillars: 

  Engineered—Designed with a forward-looking roadmap that enables organizations to integrate 

new technology as needed over time without disruption or a lengthy learning curve. 

  Manufactured—Vblock Systems are pre-integrated and pre-built to customer requirements at the 

factory before being shipped in a handful of packages to data centers.  

  Managed—VCE Vision software enables and simplifies converged operations by dynamically 

providing a high level of intelligence to any management toolset. 

  Supported—Single-call, VCE Support means no finger-pointing and quick resolution should any 

issues arise. 

  Sustained—With the help of the VCE Release Certification Matrices (RCMs), organizations can 
rely on a healthy, integrated stack of infrastructure that works effectively together going forward. 

By building more consistency and predictability into cloud environments built on standard 
technologies, VCE has delivered extraordinary results for organizations. Now, VCE is extending that 
consistency and predictability into the management and orchestration layer, offering rapid access to 
the benefits of private cloud computing thanks to VCE Integrated Solutions for Cloud Management. 
These innovative, fully integrated solutions are prepackaged, deploy quickly and easily, are simple to 
use, and promise to significantly reduce the costs of deploying and managing efficient, productive 
cloud infrastructures. 

                                                        

 

 

 

6 Frank Gens, IDC Predictions 2013: Competing on the 3rd Platform, IDC, November 2012 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All Rights Reserved. 

  

 

11 

 

 

Next Steps 

To learn more about VCE Integrated Solutions for Cloud Management and other solutions, contact a 
VCE representative or visit www.vce.com. 

 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All Rights Reserved. 

  

 

12 

 

ABOUT VCE	  
VCE, formed by Cisco and EMC with investments from VMware and Intel, accelerates the adoption of converged infrastructure and 
cloud-based computing models that dramatically reduce the cost of IT while improving time to market for our customers. VCE, 
through the Vblock Systems, delivers the industry's only fully integrated and fully virtualized cloud infrastructure system. VCE 
solutions are available through an extensive partner network, and cover horizontal applications, vertical industry offerings, and 
application development environments, allowing customers to focus on business innovation instead of integrating, validating, and 
managing IT infrastructure.  
For more information, go to http://www.vce.com. 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Copyright © 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Vblock and the VCE logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of VCE Company, LLC and/or its 
affiliates in the United States or other countries. All other trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. 

 

 

 

© 2014 VCE Company, LLC. All Rights Reserved. 

  

