Revolutionising the Customer Experience with 
Converged Infrastructure

Top row (from left to right): Steve Argiriou, Senior Manager Group Architecture, IAG; Paul O’Connor, APJ Director Alliances, VCE; 
Kieron Fitzpatrick, Head of Capability Development, Citi; Marc Evans, Head of Advice, Integration and Private Wealth Systems, 
BT Financial Group; Rob Livingstone, former Ricoh Australia CIO and author of Navigating the Cloud; Anthony Elvey, Managing 
Director, Service Providers APJ, VCE; Matthew Oostveen, CTO, Asia Pacific & Japan, VCE; Brendan Dunne, Head of Business 
Improvement, Allianz. Bottom row (from left to right): Matthew Tilley, Lead Architect, VCE; Anna O’Brien, Head of Application 
Development, Allianz; Paul Grundy, Head of Project Delivery, Service Delivery Infrastructure, Westpac; Angelo Demasi, Head of 
Strategy & Planning, AFS Digital, Westpac; Frank Cammaroto, Head of Technology, AMP; Christine Kennedy, Head of Infrastructure 
& Application Delivery,  Head of Solution Services, IAG; Ian Davison, Technology Infrastructure Head AU/NZ, Citi, Carol Hildebrandt, 
Director, Marketing, APJ, VCE.

The accelerating speed of converged infrastructure 
and the adoption of cloud-based computing models  
is leading to a dramatic reduction in the cost of IT 
and improved time-to-market. FST Media and VCE 
hosted an executive luncheon with industry leaders 
across 
technology 
and  strategy  to  discuss  converged  infrastructure 
innovations  and  how 
financial  services  can 
accelerate  next-generation  deployment  of  data 
centres and cloud infrastructure for speed, reliability 
and efficiency.

infrastructure,  architecture, 

ANTHONY  ELVEY,  VCE:  VCE 
fastest  
growing  technology  company  in  history.  In  our 
third year we exceeded $1.2 billion. We are again 
about  to  conclude  two  quarters  of  more  than  
70 per cent growth.

the 

is 

ROB LIVINGSTONE: I am a specialist generalist. By 
setting the scene and being able to ask questions, I 
challenge  prevailing  paradigms  and  assumptions 
about  the  world  of  technology  and  business.  The 
bottom line is that infrastructure is critical, but it is 
largely invisible to most stakeholders, at all levels in 
the organisation, your customers and your suppliers 
as  well.  They  do  not  care  what  infrastructure  you 
have, as long as they can operate their iPad or run 
their interface.

I  would  like  to  propose  that  there  should  be  a 
‘cloud-first’  policy  –  cloud-first,  but  private  hybrid 
model and then a public cloud.

Organisations’  operational  integrity  and  reason 
for  their  existence  depends  on  their  enterprise 
technologies. We are not talking about a small retail 
outlet; we are talking about organisations where if 

technology failed or ceased to operate, the business 
would cease to exist. Retaining visibility and control 
is the most important aspect, because if it is critical 
for your business, it is critical to see how it is working 
and what is happening.

Another point is consolidation. I have often called 
this  the  ‘sun  spot  cycle’.  Centralise,  decentralise, 
centralise,  decentralise.  Where  are  we  in  the 
cycle? The change in the landscape is with existing 
technology.  As  we  are  expected  to  deliver  within 
the  enterprise  a  unified  experience,  this  is  where 
the  whole  discipline  of  user  experience  comes 
into being. It delivers a unified experience to our 
stakeholders,  clients,  customers,  suppliers  and 
staff members. 

They  do  not  want  to  be  logging  in  and  out  of 
different  systems.  However,  when  it  comes  to 
infrastructure, there is an exponential relationship 
between the number of platforms, and the number 
of  bits  of  infrastructure  you  have  to  bolt  together. 
If you have 10 different systems spread across four 
different  countries  and  you  are  trying  to  integrate 
that to give a highly integrated rich experience, it is 
a real challenge. The exponential relationship is risk 
and cost, versus the number of technologies.

The  other  relationship  is  adaptability  to  meet 
application integration. When you are talking about 
integrating applications that is where the value is, 
but also the risks and costs, and where you are trying 
to manage an ecosystem of applications, whether it is 
in-house, public, or private cloud. Trying to manage 
the application interfaces in a volatile environment 
is not a trivial exercise.

Who  is  really  in  control  of  the  infrastructure? 
Certainly large banks and financial institutions have 
many  legacy  systems;  how  to  manage  the  nexus 
between the internal legacy and public and private 
cloud  environments  is  the  underlying  challenge. 
Ensure  that  your  applications,  your  infrastructure 
and  the  whole  stack  are  delivered,  maintained, 
supported  and  designed  with  known  cost,  known 
risk, and known value.

ANTHONY  ELVEY,  VCE:  Customers  I  meet  have 
discovered  that  they  need  to  have  a  different  way 
of  appraising  an  application  regarding  where  they 
place  it  in  the  cloud.  Some  of  the  objectivity  is 
lacking  in  the  decisions  that  are  made,  sometimes 
not by the IT department, but by business owners.

I think it is an important discussion to have. The 
reason why it relates to infrastructure is that not all 
applications are equal and not all dependencies in 
terms application mobility are fully understood by 
the business.

PAUL  GRUNDY,  WESTPAC:  We  have  seen  over 
the  last  three  to  four  years  a  real  shift  in  business 
expectations. With banking, three or four years ago 
there was a big focus on reliability; and the desire to 
make sure that our services were available to all our 
customers all the time. That was a very strong theme 
that came through the business.

That  has  not  gone  away.  Infact,  with  the 
compliance obligations there is a different lens to 
that  whole  sustainability  and  stability  question. 
What  we  have  seen,  and  the  expectations  are 
growing  almost  exponentially  month-by-month, 
is agility. Cost, reliability, and value is there for all 
of us but at the moment the most pressing concern 
is agility. The analogy that I have in infrastructure 
is  we  are  the  goalkeeper;  we  want  to  be  invisible 
in  the  game.  Our  absolute  focus  now  is  helping 
businesses  deliver  the  agility  that  they  need,  in 
response  to  the  increasing  expectations  of  our 
end customer. We have to do that in a way so that 
reliability, which is taken as a given now, does not 
become a big focus again.

MARC EVANS, BT FINANCIAL SERVICES: The risk 
we have is that they are creating their own shadow 
IT business. They can go to people-per-hour or they 
can go somewhere else and say “I can build an app 
for $10,000.” If we do not address our ability to be 
agile and get products to market quickly, then they 
are  just  going  to  do  it  for  us.  In  this  instance  an 
application will appear, and we will have to support 
it,  because  it  has  become  business  critical.  At  the 
moment  we  really  struggle  to  offer  those  dynamic 
solutions as a large organisation.

ANGELO  DEMASI,  WESTPAC:  We  need  to  assess 
the  value  of  the  service  and  understand  where  it 
might sit, cloud or not cloud? What is increasingly 
difficult  is  the  applications  and  services  that  we, 
in  the  business,  come  across.  We  think  they  are 
innovative in driving the right customer experience 
and  they  are  increasingly  cloud-based  services 
already. To some degree, we have almost passed the 
tipping point on that question, and we are already 
into  cloud  –  how  are  we  going  to  deal  with  this? 
From a business point of view it appears the benefits 
outweigh the perceived risks.

PAUL  O’CONNOR,  VCE:  Why  do  we  collectively 
struggle to deliver internally the same sort of agility 
that can be delivered externally? To address all the 
compliance issues and address the integration into 
the back-end systems.

PAUL GRUNDY, WESTPAC: The story from Westpac 
is that up until 12 months ago, every single request 
that  we  had  from  the  business  that  involved 
infrastructure,  we  treated  as  a  bespoke  request. 
Everything was custom.

We have progressed significantly over the last 12 
months. You will have heard the term ‘The Service 
Catalogue’. We are now standardising our services 
and our solutions. As maturity grows, we can then 
drive the agility, and that is what cloud providers do; 
they offer a standardised offering with a very agile 
and very fast provisioning cycle. They are setting the 
benchmark for us now. For the internal organisation, 
we have to meet that benchmark. It is the Industrial 
Revolution for infrastructure delivery.

“From a business point 
of view it appears the 
benefits outweigh the 
perceived risks.” 
– Angelo Demasi, 
Westpac

“If we do not address 
our ability to be agile 
and get products to 
market quickly, then 
they are just going to do  
it for us.”
– Marc Evans,  
BT Financial Services

2

REVOLUTIONISING THE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE WITH CONVERGED INFRASTRUCTUREANTHONY ELVEY, VCE: I think  change management 
issues  around  this  are  very  complicated;  as  you 
make  that  transition  from  seeing  everything  as  a 
custom  request,  still  maintaining  technology  silos 
the existing perceptions are very difficult to shift.

MARC  EVANS,  BT  FINANCIAL  GROUP:  Large 
organisations  have  such  a  weight  of  history, 
systems,  interfaces  and  things  that  have  not  been 
touched for more then 20-years. How do you deal 
with  that  history?  That  is  going  to  slow  everyone 
down  so  much  that  your  new  entrants  into  the 
market  are  going  to  come  in,  with  no  weight  of 
history, and say “This is easy, we can spin this up in 
a week,” whereas the weight of history and risk that 
the large organisations have makes it very difficult 
to move quickly.

KIERON  FITZPATRICK,  CITI:  Customer  demand  is 
such  that  we  are  going  to  be  providing  real-time 
access to our customers’ data, and let me emphasise 
that term, ‘customers’ data’, is their data. If we are 
not  able  to  provide  real-time  access  in  a  manner 
that is always available, we are simply going to lose 
prominence in the customers’ mindset. We are going 
to start to lose the relationship that we worked so 
hard to create. I think the customer need is critical 
and very relevant. Mobile is a key part of that and 
as  mobile  emerges,  or  is  already  the  predominant 
channel of choice for our customers; we do not have 
a choice other than to act.

PAUL GRUNDY, WESTPAC:  The  CEO  of  St  George 
Bank, George Frazis, stood up at the Trans-Tasman 
lunch  last  Friday  and  said  publicly  “mobile  is  first 
and then the other channels come second.” We in IT 
have to sit up and take notice; we have to deliver on 
those customer commitments.

MATT  OOSTVEEN,  VCE:  The  definition  around 
mobile needs to be expanded as well. It is not just the 
phone in our pocket or the tablet that we pack away 
on the transport home. Google Glass is coming out 
this year. Wearable technologies are coming into the 
environment.  People  are  going  to  want  to  interact 
with our entities utilising these types of devices. 

ANGELO  DEMASI,  WESTPAC:  Regarding  end-to-
end  service,  as  you  think  about  digitisation  and 
the  trend  that  is  occurring,  it  goes  beyond  the 
customer’s mobile, and the interaction the customer 
has  directly.  It  will  impact  and  touch  on  all  areas, 
all from staff-assisted service in our branches, how 
we  enable  our  bankers  to  be  more  mobile  all  the 
way through to our contact centre and third party 
businesses that we interact with as well. Digitisation 
is very broad, and I agree completely that we need to 
think about it from the services point of view.

ANNA  O’BRIEN,  ALLIANZ:  We  have  a  self-serve 
nature for our retail businesses, consumers want, 
access  to  their  information  real-time,  self-serve, 

pricing  on  demand,  quotes  and  buy  online, 
coupled with the whole mobile drive. I think one 
of the challenges Allianz faces, is our core back-end  
policy  management  system  is  a  20+  year-old 
legacy  system  and  historically 
integration  or 
rather  services  have  been  on  a  request  response 
mechanism.  Today  we  require  a  real-time,  highly 
responsive services layer to support our front-end 
systems. How do we make sure our infrastructure 
aligns with the business demands?

BRENDAN DUNNE, ALLIANZ: “I want it yesterday.” 
I  wholeheartedly  agree  with  that  sentiment.  I  am 
sure my insurance colleagues would love to have the 
frequency of contact that banking has. One of our 
challenges is the very different touchpoints that we 
deal  with  in  insurance.  The  emotional  attachment 
you have to your property when you have a claim is 
very different to what you have when you need to 
update your address. The customer’s view and how 
you consider that as a business is not just about the 
one-size-fits-all, or a nice cloud tool that is useful in 
one small part of your value chain or your business 
process.  You  need  to  understand  holistically,  what 
you have today and what you can do in the future; 
and deliver that consistently and seamlessly.

It  can  be  very  dangerous  to  start  doing  bespoke 
things that are great in one channel, if you do not 
offer the same thing in another channel.

It is really the integration and strategy of how it 
comes  together  that  is  the  real  challenge;  and  IT 
plays a critical part.

ROB LIVINGSTONE: The challenges that technology 
and IT are facing are in no different; how do they 
meet demands from their internal/external clients 
to  respond  rapidly,  with  new  and  innovative 
systems,  technology  and  processes?  One  of  the 
fundamental issues is being able to have everyone 
in  the  organisation  who  are  key  decision-makers 
understand broadly what the issues are. Is there real 
value  in  expanding  an  enterprise  solution,  or  is  it 
definitely only a one off? That broad complexity is 
something not limited to IT.

Everyone  within  an  IT  ecosystem,  those  with 
deep  expertise,  technical,  functional,  operational 
expertise, how do you get the business to integrate 
with  them?  How  do  you  get  the  business  to  listen 
to them, and for them to listen to the business and 
actually  understand  their  requirements?  It  is  an 
organisational challenge; it is not something that I 
believe IT can unilaterally solve.

IAN  DAVISON,  CITI:  I  have  been  in  my  role  for 
about nine months as the head of the infrastructure 
team. Prior to that, I was the head of the Consumer 
Technology team, with more of an application focus . 
So I bring a different perspective to an infrastructure 
role;  I  look  at  it  from  a  customer  perspective  and 
an  application  perspective.  Not  having  a  technical 
background  I  am  perhaps  fortunate,  with  some  of 
our  core  infrastructure  is  regionalised,  some  key 

“If we are not able 
to provide real-time 
access in a manner that 
is always available and 
always switched on, 
we are simply going to 
lose prominence in the 
customers’ mindset.” 
– Kieron Fitzpatrick, Citi

“It can be very 
dangerous to start doing 
bespoke things that  
are great in one channel, 
if you do not offer  
the same thing in  
another channel.” 
– Brendan Dunne, Allianz

3

REVOLUTIONISING THE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE WITH CONVERGED INFRASTRUCTUREdecisions  are  made  offshore.  My  interaction  with 
the  business  is  mainly  at  a  local  level.  One  of  the 
challenges I have seen is getting more engaged with 
the decisions that are made at a business level. It has 
to be real-time; you have to meet what the customer 
wants  because  that  is  the  domain  that  they  are 
working in.

I have people that have been doing a similar role 
for many years; the development path for them   has 
to be able to take advantage of all of the change that 
is coming along. It is an interesting part of what Iwe 
ae doing, to restructure a team to look to the future. 
It  is  difficult  to  tell  someone  what  they  are  going 
to be doing in three years’ time, because it is a fast-
changing environment. I am focusing a lot on people 
at the moment.

remember  multiple 

FRANK  CAMMAROTO,  AMP:  At  AMP,  we  are 
focused  on  our  customers.  What  customers  want 
is  consistent  data;  they  want  timely  data  when 
they  interact  with  you.  What  they  don’t  want 
is  to  repeatedly  give  you  the  same  information, 
log-ons.  Building  a 
or 
comprehensive  omni-channel  experience 
that 
enables this is one of our key priorities, and is what 
we are looking at addressing. As a company, we are 
now  starting  to  operate  more  horizontally  –  you 
cannot succeed at establishing an omni-channel if 
you continue to operate in silos as a business. I am 
seeing a lot more horizontal collaboration, which 
is fantastic.

ANTHONY ELVEY, VCE: I am really glad this term 
‘horizontal’ is coming up, because it is my favourite 
term.  I  had  an  interesting  conversation  the  other 
day,  not  in  the  finance  sector,  but  in  a  complex 
government  department.  The  comment  from  the 
CIO  was  “I  have  suddenly  found  myself  as  the 
only  horizontal  plane  in  our  organisation.”  He  is 
looking at multi-channel delivery for government 
services; with almost identical issues to what has 
come up on the table here. He said “The difficulty 
I have is that we have never really considered, and 
the government does not feel obliged to consider, 
how the citizen looks at us. We always look at how 
we consider the citizen. But as soon as IT becomes 
horizontal  (when  you  go  multi-channel),  the 
question becomes: Does the citizen want to interact 
with us?”

I think that is what is going to happen to all of us 
in  IT.  Once  the  cloud-based  applications  and  the 
infrastructure  consistency,  become  pervasive  in 
the business, IT will find itself at the place where it 
actually provides links across the business.

That is a very different set of responsibilities for a 
CIO. It used to be very reactive, on a demand model 
with a project basis, individual infrastructure deals 
and applications. Suddenly, we may be in a position 
to go to a department and say: “I can now see the 
link between what you are doing with the customer 
and what this team is doing with the customer, I can 
provide a horizontal platform approach.” I do think 

this is a very interesting time for IT – to see itself as 
that horizontal integrator across the business from a 
process point of view.

PAUL  GRUNDY,  WESTPAC:  A  good  example  of 
that  is  emergency  cash:  “I  lost  my  cards,  I  need 
some cash, and how am I going to get it?” Now you 
can  get  it  with  a  PIN.  That  was  a  very  horizontal 
approach in technology – there was a key business 
problem,  there  was  infrastructure  involved,  there 
was application and there was customer experience. 
It was IT’s ability to support the business in solving a 
business problem. That is where we need to be, and 
hopefully we get to a point where infrastructure is 
invisible in that process.

BRENDAN DUNNE, ALLIANZ: Deep infrastructure 
people do not have a great understanding of how 
a customer interacts with you at a touchpoint that 
might be slightly different along your value chain. 
In  insurance,  the  expectation  of  customers  and 
how  they  interact  with  you  is  different.  How  you 
codify that in your business model is new and could 
be expensive.

KIERON  FITZPATRICK,  CITI:  Often  organisations 
are  very  product-focused,  I  think  it  is  fair  to  say  
Citi  has  been  fairly  product-focused.  When  you 
are  customer-centric,  it  cuts  across  that  because 
you  look  at  it  from  a  customer  perspective.  You 
have  to  take  a  different  lens  and  say:  “What 
would  the  experience  be  like  for  customers?”; 
“What  infrastructure  and  applications  do  our  
staff  require?”  and:  “How  would  they  respond 
to support the customer?” In our case, one of our 
key  focuses  is  globalisation  and  urbanisation.  We 
need  to  support  customers  in  Shanghai,  Beijing, 
Hong Kong, and Sydney; they must have the same 
experience. So the applications and infrastructure 
need  to  give  them  a  great  experience,  not  just 
an  experience.  Part  of  the  problem 
is  that 
organisations are still product-focused. We are now 
all on the same platform. 

IAN  DAVISON,  CITI:  At  Citi,  we  have  to  engage 
much more at a regional level to have input in those 
changes.  That  is  one  of  our  challenges,  trying  to 
do  that  from  where  we  sit  geographically.  If  you 
succeed  you  have  the  advantage  of  what  is  rolled 
out globally to guide you, that is a good outcome for 
our customers.

KIERON  FITZPATRICK,  CITI:  It  is  a  journey;  the 
journey itself can be painful at times. But once you 
get to the other side, you reap the benefits. What 
you  lose  through  compromise,  you  gain  through 
collaboration.  That  is  what  we  need  to  do.  We 
need to collaborate better in our context with our 
regional colleagues. How do we collaborate better?

ANNA O’BRIEN, ALLIANZ: I think by approaching 
it at just a product level, we are actually sealing the 

“It is an interesting part 
of what I am doing, 
to try and restructure 
a team to look to the 
future. You cannot tell 
someone what they are 
going to be doing in 
three years’ time.” 
– Ian Davison, Citi

“At AMP, we are focused 
on our customers. 
What customers want 
is consistent data; they 
want timely data when 
they interact with you.” 
– Frank Cammaroto, 
AMP

4

REVOLUTIONISING THE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE WITH CONVERGED INFRASTRUCTUREorganisation’s growth. Customers want to see their 
entire  footprint  of  business  with  the  organisation 
in one log-on. If we are smart, we should leverage 
IT  to  cross-sell  to  the  customer.  When  they  do 
a  renewal  we  should  ask  a  few  extra  questions 
and  try  and  sell  them  something  additional.  By 
providing this whole agility at a product level, or 
a  silo  level,  does  not  just  give  the  wrong  or  poor 
customer experience, it does not do the right thing 
by the organisation.

KIERON  FITZPATRICK,  CITI:  Looking  at  social 
media,  how  do  our  customers  feel  about  us?  
Have  they  made  five  calls  to  us  in  the  last  
three  days  about  their  renewal?  If  so  they  are 
probably  not  very  happy.  Let’s  do  something  for 
them; not just ignore it. We need the infrastructure 
to  be  able  to  cope  with  the  volume  of  data  that 
social  media  brings,  bring  it  together  and  make 
sense of it.

ROB LIVINGSTONE: We need the ability to speak in 
absolutely clear clinical business terms; to be able 
to say: “Our assumption about this will solve that 
problem,” and having that tested is the key. Part of 
the legacy issue is that many in the IT leadership 
group  come  from  a  technology  background,  and 
for  those  that  do  not  come  from  a  technology 
background, the recent CIOs that have come from 
lines of business have a different perspective. They 
have the commercial perspective of: “Where is the 
intrinsic value?” The other issue is (and I think the 
research is showing this)  the degree and veracity of  
post-audits  after  major 
implementations  on 
projects’  initiatives  is  actually  very  poorly  done. 
It  may  be  different  in  your  industries,  and  your 
businesses,  but  there  is  very  little  time  spent  in 
learning what went wrong by spending $10 million 
on something.

PAUL GRUNDY, WESTPAC: I think there is another 
lens  to  the  legacy  application  environments,  and 
modernisation is one. The one that we are big on 
in  Melbourne  is  what  we  are  calling  ‘Application 
Simplification’. Before we modernise, let’s simplify 
the environment. For us at infrastructure, that is the 
best Christmas present the application teams could 
give us; consolidating functions on a number of key 
applications  differentiates  those  that  really  drive 
value  in  terms  of  the  customer  experience.  That 
then  frees  up  resources,  funding,  and  so  forth,  to 
invest where we need to invest.

KIERON FITZPATRICK, CITI: In Citi, I do not own the 
application. I own the relationship to the application.
The  application  is  ultimately  run  out  of  Singapore 
from our ‘data warehouse’, I own the interface to it. 
People come to me with a problem, and I will find a 
solution for them. What we will do is work through 
the priorities for them and talk about: “If we do this, 
we can also do this for another team.” It has changed 
the relationship and the dynamic in the organisation 

from  products  and  technology  to  almost  like  a 
business  partner  relationship  that  allows  us  to  be 
really quick in how we approach problems, and how 
we try to solve those problems.

ANGELO DEMASI, WESTPAC: The pleasing thing is 
that regardless of where the accountability sits, or 
who came up with the idea there is one thing that 
is certain, it is the customer who benefits at the end 
of the day. I am really glad that you brought up the 
Westpac emergency cash idea, because there will be 
a Westpac customer today, walking around Australia 
somewhere, who lost their wallet, or left their wallet 
at home, and are able to get money out of the ATM. 
That  is  a  really  pleasing  customer  outcome.  I  do 
not think you can get there unless you are able to 
integrate your business and your IT strategy. Kudos 
to our technology team for being able to assemble 
a  horizontal  view,  and  how  cross-functionally  we 
might be able to deliver a new service to market that 
will benefit customers in a really speedy timeframe. 
At the end of the day, the cumulative effort of all the 
challenges we are facing, and all the opportunities 
we are seeing, is the customer benefits.

KIERON FITZPATRICK, CITI: You only have to look 
at  the  proliferation  of  the  banking  products  that 
most  of  our  institutions  put  on  our  websites.  The 
simplification starts from IT, and from business. As 
a customer, or as a consumer looking at my range 
of options I think “I am not a banking expert, how 
am  I  meant  to  make  a  decision  from  13  different 
transaction accounts?”

ROB LIVINGSTONE: I think all too often IT people, 
especially technology-backed IT people, say: “I have 
a solution for you and this is what it will do.” This 
is  an  extremely  powerful  way  for  technologists  to 
make  senior  executives  and  important  decision-
makers stop in their tracks.

ANNA O’BRIEN, ALLIANZ: Sometimes they need to 
do that, because people in the business do not know 
what  is  possible  until  someone  from  technology 
puts it in front of them and tells them: “Here is the 
concept. I actually do not know the business value 
proposition, so I need help.” It is actually bringing 
the two together.

PAUL  GRUNDY,  WESTPAC:  How  do  you  get  an 
infrastructure person to understand the customer? 
We have been running ‘Back the Banker’ for about 
five years, and it has made a big difference. There 
is one day in the year, almost everybody in Westpac 
takes a day out of their regular job and spends the 
day in a branch and business banking centres. The 
point is to get them out and put them on the frontline 
to see the customer, and talk to them – it is amazing 
what comes back.

IAN  DAVISON,  CITI:  We  have  done  something 
similar  previously,  to  go  to  our  call  centre  and  to 

“Customers want to  
see their entire footprint 
of business with  
the organisation in  
one log-on. If we are 
smart, we should leverage 
that IT to cross-sell to  
the customer.” 
– Anna O’Brien, Allianz

“As a customer, or as a 
consumer looking at my 
range of options  
I think: “I am not a  
banking expert, how 
am I meant to make a 
decision from 13 different 
transaction accounts?” 
– Kieron Fitzpatrick, Citi

5

REVOLUTIONISING THE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE WITH CONVERGED INFRASTRUCTURE“The point is to get 
them out and put them 
on the frontline to see 
the customer, and talk 
to them – it is amazing 
what comes back.” 
– Paul Grundy, Westpac

listen to a customer call in. To assess how systems 
work, and potentially where a problem starts. They 
can  experience  the  customer’s  concerns.  I  find  it 
very useful, to put them in the customer’s position 
and have them relate to their issues.

PAUL  GRUNDY,  WESTPAC:  There  will  be  one  or 
two that go out who are technology-minded, and 
they  may  have  a  moment  of  truth,  there  may  be  
an  “Ah-ha”  moment  that  gives  you  something  
that is a point of difference, or an innovation that 
you can apply.

MATT  OOSTVEEN,  VCE:  We  talked  about  omni-
channel, we talked about multi-channel, but more 
importantly,  we  tried  to  establish  empathy  and 
understanding of what our customers are trying to 
do when they interact with our organisations, and 
how  we  can  better  serve  them.  This  is  a  marked 
difference  from  the  IT  conversations  we  were 
having only a couple of years ago when it was all 
about us.

The  second  thing  was  issues  of  velocity,  and 
agility. How can we respond more quickly? How can 
we  remain  relevant?  We  now  have  the  capability 

to  engage  with  external  providers,  the  external 
providers  know  it;  and  they  are  now  marketing 
directly.  From  an  internal  IT  perspective  we  need 
to  remain  relevant.  Lastly,  the  issue  is  one  of 
simplification and the reduction of complexity; how 
do  we  get  it  out  of  our  infrastructure  layer;  how 
do we get it out of our application layer; and how 
can we be easier to do business with, within IT and 
also  as  an  organisation  that  is  serving  these  very 
demanding customers?

PAUL O’CONNOR, VCE: John Landry, who invented 
Lotus  1,  2,  and  3,  coined  the  motto,  ‘Radical 
Simplicity’.  How  do  you  take  a  really  complex 
problem and make it beautifully simple?

ROB LIVINGSTONE: The fundamental issues we are 
looking at are no longer technology issues. Although 
paradoxically,  technology  is  absolutely  critical. 
IT  is  one  of  the  few  divisions  in  an  organisation, 
where they have a broad enterprise understanding 
of  the  taxonomy  of  the  entire  organisation,  there 
is an operational critical dependency on them. Yet 
is the one area that is least discussed at the senior 
levels in organisations.  *

About FST Media
FST Media produces the most successful technology conferences, 
roundtables and publications for the banking, insurance and 
wealth management sectors across the Asia Pacific region. With 
extensive management experience in conference production, 
journalism and business development, FST Media prides its 
reputation on unparalleled access to senior financial services 
executives, and the delivery of high-quality information on trends 
and disruptions in the financial services sector.

About VCE
VCE, or the Virtual Computing Environment Company, was formed 
in November 2009 by Cisco and EMC with investments from 
VMware and Intel. By accelerating the adoption of converged 
infrastructure and cloud-based computing models, VCE can 
dramatically reduce the cost of IT while improving time to market 
for its customers. Drawing on the best technology from its four IT 
industry-leading owners, VCE’s converged infrastructure 
innovations help customers simplify and accelerate the deployment 
of the next generation data centre and cloud infrastructures.

REVOLUTIONISING THE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE WITH CONVERGED INFRASTRUCTURE