Technology Brief 
 

 

Best Practices for keeping application data flowing 
error-free – while transitioning to 8Gbps SANs  

The continuing expansion of data centers and the introduction of new technologies such as server 
and fabric virtualization are driving the need for higher storage networking performance and greater 
capabilities from the data center fabric. Steady increases in performance and functionality have 
been the hallmark of Fibre Channel evolution over the past 15 years. With the periodic doubling of 
transport speed from 1 to 2 Gbit/sec, from 2 to 4 Gbit/sec, and to 8 Gbit/sec, storage administrators 
have exploited the new performance capabilities and advanced features to build more optimized 
storage networks.  

This paper: 

1.  Discusses some of the considerations around 8Gbps deployments 
2.  Offers best practices for ensuring a smooth transition to 8Gbps 
3.  Suggests a case for extending the life of existing 2Gbps and 4Gbps fabrics 

  

8Gbps CONSIDERATIONS 

8Gbps Challenges for Architects 
The increase in data transfer rates is potentially beneficial from a performance perspective.  
However, transitioning to higher speeds creates some new challenges for architects.  In particular, 
the potential for increased data communication error rates that may result in disruption or 
performance degradation of business critical applications. The physics of high-speed 
communication creates many new restrictions on crucial physical-layer elements such as optical 
cabling and optical modules.  These restrictions must be understood, addressed and proactively 
monitored before the full value of 8G can be realized in today’s Storage Area Network (SAN) 
infrastructures.   

As the data rate increases, sensitivity of induced jitter increases 

As the speed of Fibre Channel bit rates increase from 1G (1.0625 Gbps) to 2G (2.125 Gbps) to 4G 
(4.25 Gbps), and to 8G (8.5 Gbps), the “window” for valid data (called a bit period) decreases 
proportionally to the speed. As shown in table 1, the bit period for FC at a 1G data rate is 941 
picoseconds, whereas it falls to 235 picoseconds at 4G and only 118 picoseconds at 8G. 

 

SUMMARY 

•  8Gbps Transition 

Fibre Channel is 
the storage fabric 
of choice for speed 
and reliability 
reasons.  As such, 
most enterprises 
are taking a slow, 
phased approach 
to 8Gbps adoption.  
As with the 
transition to 
4Gbps, the SAN 
vendors expect a 
gradual, multi-year 
transition to full 
deployment of end-
to-end 8Gbps FC 
SANs.   

•  8Gbps Best 

Practices 
With higher 
speeds, it’s more 
imperative than 
ever to ensure 
clean physical 
connections, and 
to instrument and 
measure your 
infrastructure.  

•  Extending the Life 

of Existing 
Infrastructure 
Existing 
2Gbps/4Gbps 
enterprise FC 
SANs are nearly 
always vastly 
underutilized.  This 
is a classic 
example of how 
you can do more 
with less via better 
utilization of 
existing SAN 
assets.  Adding 
Virtual Instruments 
monitoring, 
measurement, and 
analysis solutions 

VirtualInstruments.com 

to your existing 
2Gbps/4Gbps 
corporate SANs 
dramatically 
improves data 
center ROI, 
eliminates 
expensive SAN 
infrastructure 
upgrades, lowers 
operational risk, 
and provides the 
flexibility to build 
out a large 
mission-critical 
application or 
cloud computing 
environment as 
needed, without 
the risk and 
expense of an 
8Gbps fabric. 

•  8Gbps VI Support 
Virtual Instruments 
offers assistance 
and risk mitigation 
protection through 
availability of our 
8Gbps ready TAPs, 
probe, optics 
/cables, protocol 
analyzer, and 
professional 
services 
consulting. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Fibre Channel Data Rates (Gbps) 

Bit Period (picoseconds) 

Table 1: Bit Period at FC Data Rates 

1G 
2G 
4G 
8G 

941 
471 
235 
118 

This reduction of the window requires a more robust infrastructure.  Otherwise, the cabling and 
communications infrastructure may induce errors into the bit stream, leading to increased bit-error 
rates and costly transmission faults, causing retries or other performance-damaging consequences, 
and potential application disruptions. 

When switching from 4G to 8G infrastructures, even well-performing 4G environments might quickly 
encounter unexpected failures running at 8G.   

Jitter, which exists in varying degrees in all optical infrastructures, can result from any component 
within the infrastructure, including the quality of the optical transceivers, length and quality of fiber 
optic cables, quantity of in-line connectors, bend radius of the cables, and even the cleanliness of 
the cable junctions.  For example: a small speck of dirt on the face of the optical cable junction, 
transparent at lower speeds, becomes a major error-inducer at higher speeds, slowing down critical 
applications.   

Implications on the SAN infrastructure   

Even if the network performed flawlessly at 4G, that does not guarantee the same result at 8G.  As 
described above, an infrastructure running at higher speeds has a much higher sensitivity to 
induced jitter from dirty connections, excessive cable bend, poor quality SFP’s, and other issues 
inherent to the infrastructure itself. A light budget and error-analysis exercise is a best practice 
to test and ensure the existing infrastructure can support the new data rates.  In some cases, 
new fiber optic cabling may be necessary to remedy any faulty infrastructure.   

Furthermore, once an infrastructure has been equipped to operate at the new higher speed, it may 
not remain error-free over a period of time.  New cable installations, the addition of patch panels, or 
even slight adjustments made with existing cable routings can significantly increase jitter and 
reduce overall link performance.  Extreme care must be taken to ensure links are as clean as 
possible, cables are not bent too much, and cable length and the number of connections are within 
the budget, preventing any foreign particles from deflecting light or excessive light loss as the light 
traverses the network. 

Unfortunately, when these transmission errors are present (but while their true root cause remains 
unknown), network administrators often rely on “rip-and-replace” tactics in the hope that this will 
remove the offending component.  Or worse, the root cause is assumed to be other SAN elements 
like host bus adapters (HBAs), and these are replaced unnecessarily. Not only is this expensive and 
extremely disruptive to the data center and to the critical applications, it often does not remedy the 
problem.  The problem may disappear temporarily, providing a false sense of security, only to re-
surface again without warning or apparent cause.  This leads to endless fire-fighting and wasted 
time that could be applied to higher-value activities. 

8Gbps TRANSITION – BEST PRACTICES 

To ensure a smooth transition to higher speed infrastructures, network administrators should follow 
these best practices: 

 

2                                                    SAN UTILIZATION – TECHNOLOGY BRIEF 
 

 

Physical Preparation 

Clean the optical modules, connectors and the cable junctions. Ensuring there is no 
contamination in the fiber optic connections is very critical for the proper operation of the 
infrastructure. Optics-grade solvents, cleaning sticks and lint-free swabs are available from 
many different manufacturers that are engineered specifically for removing microscopic particles 
and trace oils from optics. 

Instrument  

Having all of the relevant information to optimize performance and solve virtual infrastructure 
and SAN-related problems requires capturing both directions of every SCSI I/O transaction from 
start to finish, for every server/volume combination (initiator/target/LUN). Only with this 
complete information can an IT organization go about resolving performance or availability 
problems.  

In order to capture all of the SCSI transactions without impacting performance or reliability, the 
Fibre Channel SAN should be fully instrumented at every link that would carry business-critical 
data. As a key part of the Virtual Instruments solution, the Traffic Access Point (TAP) is the 
device that enables full instrumentation of the Fibre Channel network. It “taps” the network. 

The Virtual Instruments TAP or TAP Patch Panel System is a passive, non-performance 
impacting device that operates “out-of-band” and requires no power source or cooling. The 
TAP generates a copy of all data that is traversing the SAN by utilizing a small portion of the 
light within the fibre-optic cable and sends it to the Virtual Instruments SAN Performance Probe 
device for further processing.  

With TAPs installed on all key links within the data center, users can deploy a number of devices 
that monitor and diagnose link performance without any further interruption or downtime.  These 
devices, which include light meters and protocol analyzers, are engineered to detect a number 
of issues such as light levels, signal quality, throughput metrics, latency and response times, 
and protocol violations. These metrics provide a good indication of the health of the 
infrastructure and proactively identify failing devices or bad links – all in real-time and at full line 
speed.  An instrumented infrastructure takes the guesswork out of understanding optical link 
health, providing accurate visibility into the infrastructure operation. 

With TAPs, an optical power budget analysis can be performed between transmit and receive 
ports. Make sure that the power margin (transmit power – power loss due to the length of the 
cable and the connectors between the two ports) is above the required receive power of the 
optical transceivers and meets the FC protocol specification. 

Measure the light levels on the transmit side and receive side. Using light testers or light meters, 
measure the optical power levels on critical links and make appropriate adjustments to the 
length of the cables or bend radii of the cables. In some cases better quality optical transceivers 
or cables may be necessary to meet the power margin requirements.   

This real-time visibility into infrastructure is extremely important as data rates increase from 2G 
and 4G to 8G rates. TAPs empower the SAN to provide uninterrupted access to business critical 
application data and enable proactive alerting to potential infrastructure problems.   

EXTENDING THE LIFE OF 2G AND 4G FABRICS 

Overview 
In most corporate data centers, 2Gbps and 4Gbps Fibre Channel Storage Area Network (SAN) links 
are over-provisioned by a factor of 5x or more, on average.   This is due to a lack of visibility into 
actual SAN performance and utilization data, which has led to massive hardware link over-
provisioning in an attempt to avoid performance issues, to maximize availability, and to simply 
minimize risk.  Traditional SAN management tools usually report on IOPS, a very poor indicator of 
network utilization.  The emergence of VMware virtualization technology, making server resources 
flexible and applications readily mobile, adds another layer of abstraction and makes SAN visibility 
even worse. 

While it’s generally accepted that SAN storage utilization is low, only a few industry luminaries, such 

3                                                    SAN UTILIZATION – TECHNOLOGY BRIEF 
 

 

as John Toigo, have talked about the severe underutilization of Fibre Channel (FC) SAN fabrics.  
The challenge of course, is that few IT shops have actually instrumented their SANs to enable 
accurate measurements of fabric utilization.  Instead, 100% of enterprise applications get the 
bandwidth that perhaps only 5% of the applications need.  “Better to be safe than sorry” is the oft-
repeated mantra.  But with SAN sizes rising at a 30 – 50% / year rate, many CFOs are starting to 
examine more than just the costs of servers and disks.  They’re looking at the entire infrastructure. 

Over the past 2 years, Virtual Instruments has instrumented a significant number of global enterprise 
datacenters and for the first time, we remove the guesswork and present our report on FC SAN 
fabric utilization. Following is a chart that shows 2Gbps/4Gbps SAN utilization rates for some 
representative large enterprise SANs, before they undertook optimization projects with Virtual 
Instruments.  Virtual Instruments has profiled dozens of large Global 1000 enterprise customers and 
the results are remarkably consistent – average utilization rates well below 10%.   

 Customer 

Average FC Storage Port  

Utilization Rate 

Large European Bank  

US Investment Bank   

US Energy Company  

International Consumer Products Company  

3.0% 

1.1% 

4.87% 

8.6% 

Beyond the obvious unnecessary expense the reality is, with such low utilization rates, simply 
building in more SAN hardware (HBAs, switches, cables, SFPs, storage ports) to address 
performance and availability challenges does nothing more than add complexity and increase risk.   
The more components that are deployed, the higher the probability of a failure.  Most organizations’ 
data stores are growing 30 - 50% per year, which means SAN infrastructures are growing at a 
similar rate.  With compliance regulations such as HIPAA, Sarbanes-Oxley, BASEL II and others 
requiring corporations to keep increasing amounts of data longer, the demands on your storage 
infrastructure are only compounding.  Though it’s common to look at storage space itself as the 
place to reduce costs, especially with deduplication technology, the “network” in “SAN” can 
contribute to costs as well.  It’s not unusual for a storage port, after cabling, etc. to cost between 
$4K and $5K USD.  It’s no longer financially practical to overprovision SAN infrastructure. Most 
SANs are designed with redundancy, so over provisioning is really doubly expensive. 

On the server side, IT is investing in server virtualization to consolidate servers and reduce capital 
and operating expenses.   The same can be true for the SAN: virtualization and consolidation of 
underutilized SAN assets can easily save Global 1000 companies millions of dollars per year. 

Optimized 2Gbps/4Gbps SAN Infrastructure can support future requirements 
According to the statistics we’ve gathered from measuring Global 1000 corporate SANs, existing 
2Gbps and 4Gbps SAN infrastructure can easily support more applications or a virtualized 
infrastructure, including private cloud computing environments.  Balanced optimization of all SAN 
I/O transactions between servers and LUNs can enable support for a significantly greater number of 
servers and storage arrays with existing network infrastructures. 

Increasing utilization of existing SAN infrastructure via intelligent load balancing would extend the 
return on investment (ROI), reduce complexity and risk, and help avoid both the potential headaches 
and excessive cost of implementing newer SAN hardware technology.  For instance, many 
companies have found that they have to replace their physical infrastructure (patches and cables) in 
order to use 8Gbps environments. When purchasing 8Gbps SFPs, you will need to either manually 
set each port to 4Gbps, or ensure that your infrastructure is 8Gbps-ready. Doubling or even a 
tripling of average utilization rates of 2Gbps/4GB fabrics is now possible with the proper use of real-
time monitoring and measurement solutions. 

Unnecessary capital and operating expense can be avoided with optimization of your existing SAN 
infrastructure.   Capital expense savings would result from the delay or complete avoidance of the 

4                                                    SAN UTILIZATION – TECHNOLOGY BRIEF 
 

 

acquisition of additional SAN switches, related software licenses, additional cables, and new racks – 
potentially from the delay of building out and an entire new data center. 

Operating expense savings would come from the delay or avoidance of costs related to 
implementation, configuration, testing, and documentation of new SAN infrastructure.  Other 
operating expenses avoided include annual maintenance fees, management software licenses, 
power consumption, and cooling and floor space. 

Optimization and troubleshooting of corporate SAN infrastructure is difficult, as existing 
management tools only give device-specific information.   None of these tools provide a single view 
for all I/O transactions. If you’re not able to measure all of the transaction data between servers and 
the LUNs, it is very difficult to understand what issues are causing problems and how to fix them. 

The Solution:  Virtual Instruments’ VirtualWisdom 

Virtual Instruments VirtualWisdom enables IT to optimize existing 2Gbps/4Gbps SAN infrastructure 
so it can provide consistent performance and reliability to support virtualized applications and 
internal cloud computing operations.  VirtualWisdom is the only product that can monitor and send 
alerts about storage access times, congestion, link errors, and SCSI errors, and generate trend 
reports that show the behavior of a heterogeneous SAN, over time. This information helps to 
expedite troubleshooting and allows IT administrators to prove whether the problem is in the SAN or 
elsewhere, such as applications, hosts, or VMware VM’s. 

Summary 
Existing 2Gbps/4Gbps enterprise FC SANs are nearly always vastly underutilized.  This is a classic 
example of how you can do more with less via better utilization of existing SAN assets.  Adding 
Virtual Instruments monitoring, measurement, and analysis solutions to your existing 2Gbps/4Gbps 
corporate SANs dramatically improves data center ROI, eliminates expensive SAN infrastructure 
upgrades, lowers operational risk, and provides the flexibility to build out a large mission-critical 
application or cloud computing environment as needed.  

Transitioning the storage infrastructure to higher data rates has many benefits.  However, it is 
paramount to understand the hidden pitfalls that may impact application performance and 
availability.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Corporate Headquarters 
25 Metro Drive Suite 400 
San Jose, CA 95110 
Phone:  408-579-4000 
Fax:  408-579-4001 

 

Sales 
sales@virtualinstruments.com 
Phone:  408-579-4081 

Support 
support@virtualinstruments.com 
 

©2011 Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are 
trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or servicemarks 
of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 09/11 

5                                                    SAN UTILIZATION – TECHNOLOGY BRIEF 
 

