Top 5 mobile APM myths

Mobile is now regarded as the most explosive 
source of revenue growth, employee productivity 
improvement, and customer engagement. GigaOm 
research reports that mobile users represented 
40 percent of eBay’s 36 million new users in 2013, 
accounting for $35 billion in enabled commerce 
volume (ECV) — an astounding increase of 88 percent 
over the prior year.

An AppDynamics Business White PaperAngry Birds app only 35 
days to reach 50 million 
users!

However, mobile engagement is a very tricky one. Because the mobile user is so 
focused on the mobile app while interacting with it, it is an intense interaction 
over a rather small screen. With so many alternative choices at their fingertips, 
the user has almost no tolerance towards ill-designed or poorly performing mobile 
applications. The last I heard the iTunes App Store has 1.2 million apps. For the 
Android user, there are about 1.3 million apps to try from. Loyalty needs to be 
earned, and cannot be taken for granted. Plus, a lot of your brand value and 
revenue/cost savings are at stake.

It is not as hopeless as it sounds, however. Remember, mobile users are also known 
for rewarding a great experience; it took the Angry Birds app only 35 days to reach 
50 million users! The total franchise value including merchandise, etc. had exploded 
to a few billion dollars at their peak. Mobile is a high velocity market. The first 
mover’s advantage is tremendous, and you need to take charge of your experience 
with the right mobile application performance monitoring (mAPM) tools at hand.

There is a lot of confusion in the market today. So in this blog post, I’d like to dispel 
some key myths around mobile apps. And how, with the right mAPM tool, you can 
nail your mobile app experience — both interactivity-wise and performance-wise — 
and thereby win the market. 

Myth #1: Unforgiving app ratings on the app store is an unfortunate reality 
There is no such thing as bug-free code. Any sufficiently complex code will have 
bugs, and so will your mobile app. Your users understand this reality but are 
looking for well thought-out designs that have fewer performance and crash issues. 
Customers are also amenable to quick fixes and are willing to give chances to 
organizations that are responsive to bugs, performance issues, and crashing issues. 
The critical success factor here is the turnaround time. 

In order to avoid brutal app ratings, you need to a ship a good product, but more 
importantly show you are willing to respond to your user problems and fix them 
promptly. Use state of the art crash analytics and network request analytics 
to understand how your app is performing. The ideal mAPM tool should show 
the crashes and their stack traces in near real-time as they happen. For fastest 
response time, the mAPM tool should group these crashes based on common 
patterns and uniqueness. The same mAPM tool should also provide network 
request latencies at group levels as well as individual request levels. Resolution of 
information should not be lost when troubleshooting performance and crash issues. 

2

Top 5 mobile APM mythsIn order to avoid brutal 
app ratings...show you 
are willing to respond to 
your user problems and 
fix them promptly. 

Myth #2: Backend services are black boxes of performance bottlenecks and I 
should just give up on them
I keep observing the finger pointing between mobile developers and the IT Ops 
teams. Those mobile developers who use mobile-only APM tools have visibility 
only till the point where a network request is made from the mobile app. Anything 
beyond is pretty much a black box which is usually the main cause for performance 
delays and mobile app’s poor response time. For the lack of better information, the 
mobile developer is quick to blame the back end service. On the other hand, the IT 
Ops team that has invested in legacy APM solutions that are unable to distinguish 
mobile-originating transactions from the others. They often struggle to isolate the 
mobile transaction delays caused by their services and get defensive.

A modern end-to-end APM solution that delivers context-awareness for 
transactions originating from mobile devices all the way to the backend database 
or even storage would completely take away the guesswork in performance 
troubleshooting. And if the entire infrastructure can be managed with a single pane 
of glass, there will be no information lost in translation and the mobile dev and IT 
Ops team can collaborate to focus on nailing down the end-user experience rather 
than play the blame game.

This is the most critical requirement we hear from our customers time and again.

3

Top 5 mobile APM mythsThe entire infrastructure 
can be managed with a 
single pane of glass.

Myth #3: Users are an enigma that I can never really understand 
You cannot nail down the mobile end-user experience unless you know your 
audience. You need to understand where the end user is spending time while using 
your application. Are they spending time scrolling down search results to find what 
they want? In other words, are you presenting the most relevant information at the 
top? Are they abandoning the shopping cart at any specific points in the checkout 
process? Is there funnel friction you need to optimize your app against?

The modern mobile APM tools have some great capabilities to understand your end 
user and their behavior. You can inject timers across any two arbitrary points and 
measure times taken for a collection of any number of steps. For example, you can 
measure how long it takes your user from conducting the first search to purchasing a 
product or a service. This can be done at an individual user or at aggregate levels. You 
can measure how much time users spend on which screen. This will give you great 
insights into who your typical user is and what interactions do they indulge in with your 
application. You can then optimize the app experience for those common patterns.

Myth #4: I’m going to spend the rest of my life certifying my mobile app on the 
infinite permutations and combinations of device types, OS types, and network 
carriers/types
This is where you need concrete data to understand your user demographics. A 
good mAPM solution will give you detailed breakdown of who your core audience 
is. What device types they prefer, what OS’s (iOS vs. Android) they run, and which 
networks they mostly originate from. A good APM solution will also allow you to 
correlate this information with revenue or engagement information to determine 
your highest-value audience.

With all this valuable information, you can prioritize development, testing, and 
certification of your mobile app. You can even optimize your app experience and test 
for performance bottlenecks for the high-value audience. And lastly, you can focus on 
retaining them by delivering on their roadmap demands over the lesser engaging ones.

4

Top 5 mobile APM mythsOptimize the app 
experience for those 
common patterns.

Prioritize development, 
testing, and certification 
of your mobile app.

Myth #5: There’s no way to know the business impact of the performance 
issues of my mobile app
Most mAPM tools in the market today are too developer-centric. They deliver 
crash analytics and performance delays caused by delayed response from backend 
services but little else. Often times, the mobile channel is an enabler of some 
business goals such as better customer engagement, additional revenue streams, 
cost savings from productivity or efficiency gains. Plus, it’s the broader context that 
feeds investments into the mobile channel. Ignoring the business context is like 
missing out on half the picture.

The right tool needs to deliver full context on the mobile application. The full 
context should include what impact the app has on business metrics such as 
revenues, cost savings, customer engagement KPIs, etc. A comparative chart 
that shows performance impact of mobile app on these business metrics can be 
incredibly powerful to raise awareness among the organization.

With these myths dispelled, I hope you have gotten a different perspective on your 
mobile app initiatives and are rethinking your approach to mobile APM. 

Try it FREE at  
appdynamics.com

AppDynamics, Inc. 
appdynamics.com

Copyright © 2014 AppDynamics, Inc. All rights reserved. The term 
APPDYNAMICS and any logos of AppDynamics are trademarked or 
registered trademarks of AppDynamics, Inc.

