INFRASTRUCTURE

PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

Optimizing Performance, Health and Utilization 

and Enabling IT to Become a Trusted, Ever-Agile Business Partner

WHITEPAPER

Enterprise IT Agility Challenges: Cost, Complexity, Convergence 
Technology  and  application  trends  such  as  Big  Data,  storage  and 
server  growth,  mobile  applications,  bring-your-own-device  (BYOD) 
and social media are the biggest disrupters of Enterprise IT today. The 
resultant  pressure  on  IT  organizations  is  to  deliver  24x7  “dial-tone” 
service  levels  that  align  with  business  demands  for  availability  and 
performance  while  remaining  ever-agile  to  meet  continually  evolving 
application and business requirements. Compounding the complexity 
and  risk  of this “new  normal”  state  on  mission-critical  infrastructures 
are complex interdependencies and technology advances—leading to 
blindingly  fast  servers,  converging  infrastructure  components,  mass 
adoption of virtualization, and rapid migration to the private cloud . The 
key driver behind all of these trends is demand for anytime/anywhere 
application access and flawless performance—from any device. All this 
exponentially  increases  storage  requirements,  mobile  data,  IP  traffic 
and  servers,  and  fuels  advances  in  new technologies. The  result  is  a 
never-ending pace of rapid transformation, and explosive increase in 
complexity and risk.

Data managed within enterprise datacenter
Storage growing from 0.8zb in 2009 to 35zb in 2020
Mobile Data traffic growth from mobile devices
IP traffic growth
Servers worldwide growth

50x

44x

26x

15x

10x

2011

2014

2017

2020

The New “Normal”
Current IT infrastructures are at a point where the entire system, from 
server  to  storage  fabric  and  storage  arrays  have  all  been  virtualized 
and abstracted to the extent that clear visibility into performance and 
issue  resolution  are  on-going  challenges. As  multi-vendor,  multi-layer 
data  center  architectures  perpetually  change,  views  from  the  user, 
administrator and application are increasingly de-coupled from the actual 
physical architectures. As a result, a clear and unbiased understanding 
of  the  physical  infrastructures,  the  applications  dependent  on  them, 
and how they are performing, is difficult to achieve. Moreover, this “new 
normal”  state  makes  it  nearly  impossible to  manage  with  confidence 
and  authority.  These  circumstances  are  creating  inherent  gaps  in 
visibility  that  must  be  addressed  in  order  to  guarantee  performance 
and availability.

Summary

•  Enterprise IT Agility 

Challenges Mission critical 
IT application delivery 
infrastructures are being 
virtualized at a break-neck 
pace, and are increasingly 
abstracted and complex. Agile 
development means changes 
are continual, and these same 
infrastructures are required 
to deliver a flawless end-user 
experience characterized by 
hyper-responsive performance 
and availability.

•  Impediments to Aligning IT 

Organizations with Business 
Goals Not having the right 
people, processes and 
technology solutions, and 
leveraging old technologies 
that weren’t purpose-built to 
handle today’s complex and 
ever-changing infrastructure, 
prevents IT from delivering 
business-aligned service 
levels.

•  Infrastructure Performance 

Management (IPM) – a 
Platform to Ensure IT Business 
Value IPM is a new platform 
category for managing the 
physical, virtual and cloud 
infrastructure.

•  Capabilities Required in 

an IPM Platform 
Key requirements include 
continuous, real-time, 
system-wide data collection 
from heterogeneous IT 
infrastructures, combined 
with unbiased correlation and 
analysis. 

•  Benefits of an IPM platform 
Delivers ROI to the business 
for both CAPEX and OPEX 
savings and optimization; 
guarantees performance, 
mitigates risk and aligns IT 
infrastructures with business 
and application requirements. 

•  Virtual Instruments’ 

VirtualWisdom platform 
A comprehensive IPM platform 
providing 360o visibility into 
the performance, health 
and availability of the IT 
infrastructure. 

2

Managing the New “Normal” 

It’s now business-critical for enterprises to have a purpose-built infrastructure performance management platform. 
One that is specifically designed for granular, real-time monitoring of performance throughout the infrastructure 
supporting mission critical applications and business processes. One that also assures system-wide performance 
and availability. This platform should enable infrastructure teams (no matter if they are server, storage, virtualization 
or performance focused) to de-risk mission critical workloads across physical, virtual and cloud based computing 
environments.  At  the  same  time  it  should  also  provide  deep  insights  into  the  real-time  performance  of  the  IT 
infrastructure, so that the risk of virtualizing new applications and deploying new technologies can be minimized. 
Leveraging such a platform would allow IT Organizations to align with business demands and application requirements, 
and become a trusted partner in driving business growth. 
 

Impediments to Aligning IT Organizations with Business Goals: 
Minding and Managing the Gap
 
There are three main factors—people, processes and technology—and any one of them can prevent IT organizations 
from reaching a state of maturity, where they are seen by the broader organization as a business advantage that 
can deliver exacting, cost-optimized service levels back to the organization.

• 

• 

• 

 People  and  Organizational  Structure:  The  IT  organization  itself  can  impact  business  alignment,  particularly 
if  resources  and  management  are  functionally  siloed.  For  example,  organizations  are  often  divided  into 
Application,  Server,  Network,  and  Storage  administrators.  If  there  is  a  performance  problem,  the  various 
administrators  tend  to  make  sure  that  it  is  not  occurring  in  their  domain. This  structure  pits  teams  against 
each  other  and  results  in  finger  pointing. This  predicament  is  further  antagonized  by  device-specific  system 
administration  tools  that  provide  a  biased,  myopic  focus  on  only  one  facet  of  an  IT  infrastructure. When  it 
comes to interrelated and interdependent systems, without a holistic and unbiased view of the environment, it’s 
nearly impossible to manage performance—let alone quickly find root causes of problems or set accurate SLAs.  

 Process  and  IT  Maturity:  IT  organizations  are  forever  focused  on  providing  cost  appropriate  service  levels  but 
many  lack  the  processes  or  metrics  to  fully  realize  their  commitments.  The  reasons  range  from  a  lack  of 
executive  sponsorship,  to  over-allocated  or  mis-allocated  resources,  to  little  or  no  institutionalized  business 
collaboration processes. In all cases, teams must focus on finding and resolving specific problems. However 
in many cases, they lack the proper instrumentation and processes for fast and conclusive resolution. Many IT 
teams try to focus on aligning their operations with business goals. Often, however, this ends up being more of 
a hope than a reality. Without continuing executive commitment to people and processes (backed by accurate 
data) it’s tough to achieve alignment. Having uniform processes in place, especially when there are multiple 
stakeholders  with  different  reporting  structures,  incentives  and  goals—often  proves  impossible  to  maintain.  

 Technology and Tools for Yesterday’s Environments: Systems Management tools have traditionally focused on specific 
components of an infrastructure, such as provisioning and monitoring server resources, managing storage capacity, 
or utilization of the storage and network fabric. In most cases these legacy device-specific tools have been marketed 
as performance monitoring, even though it is only monitoring utilization. Neither singularly or combined do these 
tools provide the necessary performance information that Application, Server, Storage and Cloud administrators 
need to understand how their mission-critical systems infrastructures are actually performing. They lack real-time 
performance metrics, like infrastructure response times for executing actions, and efficiency in moving data/
information. They also have limited scalability, are often agent-based and vendor-specific. These cobbled together 
tool sets may try to show that the overall IT environment is working fine, with the right capacities and resources 
provisioned. However, if application response is poor, related IT service levels are still deemed unsatisfactory.  

3

A Moment of Clarity: Performance versus Utilization. Infrastructure monitoring tools use utilization metrics to infer the 
potential impact on performance. Since they are not measuring true performance, it leads teams to over provisioning 
resources in order to ensure that utilization doesn’t impact performance. However, inferring performance when over-
provisioning is no longer acceptable, is not an option. The days of over-provisioning to ensure performance are gone, 
since it’s no longer viable with hyper data growth and accompanying cost pressures—especially when the fundamental 
promise of virtualization and the cloud is to drive down costs and achieve greater utilization against existing assets. 

Requirements  for  IT  to  be  Ever-Agile:  Another  important  factor  placing  everything  at  risk  is  the  ever-changing  IT 
infrastructure landscape. Systems Management tools were originally designed for monitoring physical elements, but 
with the advent of Virtualization and Cloud architectures—those tools are neither appropriate nor useful for managing 
the related complexities. The continued virtualization and abstraction of the infrastructure and underlying physical 
elements, makes performance management, problem avoidance, root cause problem analysis and remediation of 
the physical elements all the more difficult.

IPM: Defined

Infrastructure Performance Management is the ability to continuously capture, correlate and analyze in real-time, 
the  system-wide  performance,  utilization  and  health  of  heterogeneous  physical,  virtual  and  cloud  computing 
environments. Ultimately, IPM enables IT to establish and maintain the service levels the business requires while 
driving the systems level optimization and agility that is the promise of virtualization and the cloud. 
 

IPM: Managing Through Compounding Complexity and Risk to Assure 
IT Business Value and Alignment
 
Infrastructure Operations and Management teams are forever under pressure to deliver IT service levels that are aligned 
with enterprise business goals and application performance requirements. In fact business processes and application 
teams often set IT’s priorities in terms of availability and performance. Moreover, new IT infrastructure compute 
models include hybrid environments where portfolios of applications are migrated between and reside within physical, 
virtual and cloud environments simultaneously. The result is compounded complexities in monitoring, managing and 
reporting—necessitating an IPM platform for assuring performance optimization, risk mitigation and sustainable SLA’s.  
 
Trying  to  manage  through  this  complexity, 
forces the device-specific management tools of 
yesterday to change. In the past, management 
tools  focused  on  capacity,  utilization  and 
management of individual physical components. 
With  the  move  to  Virtualization  and  new 
deployment  models,  Application  Performance 
Management (APM) and Network Performance 
Management (NPM) have been trying to extend 
and  fill-in  for  what’s  missing.  The  challenge 
is  that  neither  delivers  a  holistic  view  of  the 
underlying IT infrastructure. So, between all of 
these tool sets that address device, application 
and network performance, there is still a huge 
gap in understanding system-wide performance.

This can be solved with a real-time Infrastructure 
Performance Management platform.

4

Real-Time IPM Platform Requirements 

An  IPM  platform  must  be  able  to  continuously  capture,  correlate  and  analyze  system-wide  heterogeneous 
infrastructure performance, utilization and health metrics in real-time. It must provide an unbiased view of system-wide 
infrastructure performance, from virtual machine, to server, to switch fabric, to storage array to logical unit of storage.  

 Continuous,  Granular  Monitoring  and  Measurement: The  most  important  metric  for  IT  Infrastructure  performance 
is infrastructure response times. This is defined as the time it takes for any application, running on a physical 
server or Virtual machine to place an I/O request and get a response back. In large, highly virtualized and/or 
cloud infrastructures, too much happens within a five or 20 minute polling-interval that shouldn’t be glossed-
over. For any monitoring to be effective, organizations need to capture the minimum, maximum and average 
at  no  greater  than  one  second  intervals  for  accurate  insight  into  the  overall  infrastructure  performance. 

 Unbiased and Heterogeneous: Infrastructures by design are heterogeneous, with multiple vendors delivering their 
part of a complete physical, virtual and cloud solution. An IPM platform must collect data from various devices 
without vendor or product-specific bias or dependencies. It must deliver an unbiased, vendor independent view of 
the whole system—with precise metrics that enable understanding of what is happening throughout the system. 

 System-Wide Data Collection, Visibility and Analytics: The IPM platform must capture, organize and correlate metrics 
about all the infrastructure elements. This means from the virtual machine, server, fabric, storage arrays and logical unit 
number. Further, the data must be presented in a way that clearly describes interdependencies in context of system-
wide performance. The data must also be persisted, to make it easy to go back in time and pinpoint exactly where 
and when a performance impacting event happened and how it affected the system overall. The IPM platform must 
track all granular I/O activity across highly virtualized infrastructures—from server transmission, through the switch 
to storage and back—and leverage an analytics framework for contextual understanding, correlation and discovery. 

 Scalability: A typical virtualized enterprise IT infrastructure is comprised of thousands to hundreds-of-thousands 
of servers and switch and storage I/O ports, and petabytes of storage. An IPM platform must be able to handle 
the large number of installed physical devices and the associated metrics without a hiccup and without risk of 
hitting a limit. Most legacy device or system managers struggle with scale by design. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 

Benefits of an IPM platform

An IPM platform delivers numerous CAPEX and OPEX benefits to both IT and the business:
• 

 Operational  Efficiency  and  Effectiveness:  Cross-domain  system  visibility  enables  comprehensive  measurement 
of the  infrastructure  performance  from the Virtual  Machine  all the  way to the  storage  LUN.  So  performance 
bottlenecks  can  be 
impacting  the  business—resulting 
in  significantly  higher  performance—and  enabling  higher  utilization  of  existing  infrastructure  assets. 
Additionally,  IPM  helps  IT  improve  infrastructure  response  times,  proactively  avoid  outages,  quickly 
identify  root  cause  and  remediate  performance  issues,  and  drive  continuous  improvement  in  reliability. 

identified  and  corrected  proactively,  before 

• 

 Risk Mitigation: IPM enables highly accurate baselining to proactively identify the impact of any and all changes to 
the infrastructure. This improves forecast accuracy, and results are seen in real-time. For example, IT can migrate 
applications from physical to virtual and cloud environments with much lower risk. Application performance has 
an interdependent relationship with the infrastructure it runs on. Different applications require different resource 
quality,  and  compete  for  resources  with  other  applications,  so  it  is  important  to  manage  the  infrastructure 
accordingly. By leveraging IPM data, it’s possible to project application performance and ensure that business 
processes are executing as they should. This is equally applicable whether the change process spans months of 
engineering design, test and rollout, or as it becomes more real-time in highly automated cloud environments. 

5

• 

 Business Alignment: The  business  side  of  an  enterprise  is  mainly  concerned  with  providing the  service  levels 
required  by  their  users  and  having  an  agile  response  as  those  requirements  change  and  evolve—all  while 
optimizing the related operational (OPEX) and infrastructure capital expenses (CAPEX). For IT organizations, IPM 
gives the ability to stay in lock-step with business agility. IPM helps IT quickly identify root causes, and proactively 
(and significantly) reduce mean time to resolution. By increasing system utilization, reducing over-provisioning 
and making the correct decisions on infrastructure spend versus performance required, CAPEX is significantly 
reduced. Having an IPM platform helps cut through virtualization complexity, accelerates transformation and 
minimize risks.

The IPM Platform: Enabling IT Organizations for Ever-Agile Business Alignment 

Though it’s still important to understand utilization and how it affects performance, it’s now essential to understand 
it  within  the  context  of  true  infrastructure  response  times.  It’s  critical  to  understand  how  the  infrastructure  is 
delivering  the  resources  required  by  the  applications  relying  on  it,  and  if  the  resources  are  delivering  the  right 
service  levels.  Virtual  Instruments’  VirtualWisdom  IPM  Platform  was  purpose-built  from  the  ground  up  to 
address  all  of  the  challenges  and  gaps  resulting  from  the  circumstances  and  evolutionary  scenarios  described 
above.  It  delivers  a  continuous  real-time  understanding  of  application  data  behavior  at  the  protocol  level 
throughout  physical,  virtual  and  cloud  infrastructures.  Whereas  other  management  tools  focus  on  utilization 
and  health  at  the  device  layer,  the VirtualWisdom  IPM  Platform  looks  at  the  entire  compute  environment  from 
a  systems  level—focusing  on  correlation  and  interdependencies  of  performance,  utilization  and  health  overall. 
 
The benefits for IT organizations are multi-fold, as they are now enabled to:
•  Right size and align infrastructure capacity and resource quality
•  Drive greater utilization against existing assets and resources
•  Accurately measure I/O traffic, correlate system-wide data and monitor trends
• 
•  Proactively, accurately and quickly identify and remediate problems. 
•  Deliver the right level of performance at the appropriate cost
•  Establish SLAs aligned with business requirements
•  Effectively partner with and contribute to the success of the business

Improve infrastructure response times

Virtual Instruments’ VirtualWisdom®: The Award Winning IPM Platform

VI’s  VirtualWisdom  is  the  industry  leading  IPM 
platform for customers’ physical, virtual and private 
cloud computing environments. VirtualWisdom has 
been architected from the ground-up to measure 
and  ensure  the  performance,  utilization  and 
health  of  mission-critical  systems  infrastructures. 
It  is  comprised  of  VirtualWisdom  application 
software  and  three  distinct  probes  that  capture 
metrics  from  multiple  data  sources  throughout 
the  open  system.  The  platform  server  persists 
and  correlates  the  granular  metrics  collected  to 
deliver authoritative visibility, trending, alerting and 
reporting. VirtualWisdom delivers the industry’s only 
real-time, unbiased and system-wide Infrastructure 
Performance Management solution.

Virtual Server ProbeVM

Servers & VMs

VirtualWisdom Server

SAN Availabilty ProbeSW

FC Switch Fabric

SANInsight® TAP Patch Panels

SAN Performance ProbeFC8-HD48

SAN Performance ProbeFC8-HD

AND/OR

SAN Performance ProbeFC8

Storage Arrays

6

VirtualWisdom Server and Dashboard 
The VirtualWisdom  Server  is  a  robust,  database-driven  application that  controls  and  collects  metrics  from  both 
hardware and software probes. The platform persists all metrics collected over time and organizes these metrics 
in  both  physical  and  logical  groupings. This  enables  advanced  correlation  and  analysis  across  all  layers  of  the 
open  systems  stack.  This  capability  also  delivers  on  the  requirements  for  real-time  alerting,  historic  trending 
and  reporting  and  advanced  ‘what-if’  modeling.  The  VirtualWisdom  server  also  provides  a  fully  customizable 
Dashboard UI, which displays a time-correlated, cross-domain view of the performance, utilization and health of 
the system as a whole, based on the deep, granular metrics available from the probes. The dashboard is entirely 
configurable, so the display and reports can be presented in a user defined context that fits with the enterprise’s 
operational  process.  It  also  provides  for  integration  with  third-party  products  and  management  frameworks.  

VirtualWisdom Virtual Server Probe
The Virtual  Server  Probe  is  a  software-based  probe  that  is  integrated  with VMware  vCenter  and  collects  more 
than  100  metrics  on  the  associated VMware  estate.  Some  of  the  metrics  captured  by  this  probe  include  CPU 
utilization and status, memory utilization, disk I/O requests and capacity, as well as network requests and utilization 
by Virtual Machine, ESX Host and Cluster. The metrics are then persisted and correlated with the metrics from the 
other VirtualWisdom probes, enabling end-to-end correlation from virtual machine to the logical unit of storage. 

VirtualWisdom SAN Availability Probe
The SAN Availability Probes is a software-based probe that collects key data from Fibre Channel and FCoE directors, 
switches and embedded devices via SNMP. The software probes collect comprehensive metrics for every active 
port in the SAN and organizes them according to the attached device type. Some representative metrics include 
utilization, frames, bytes, reads and writes, as well as key faults such as loss of synchronization, link resets, link 
failures, packet discards and CRC errors. Organizing these metrics according to the attached device type enables 
customers to manage storage, servers, ISL’s and other devices through global rules as opposed to a port-by-port 
basis. The metrics are captured and reported to the VirtualWisdom Server on a user configurable time-based interval.  

SAN Performance Probes
The hardware-based SAN Performance Probes are the most advanced, high performance line-rate data capture 
and analysis devices available in the industry. These devices sit at the protocol layer to capture and analyze every 
FC frame header and SCSI Command on the SAN in real-time, at 2, 4 and 8 Gbits per second. These probes capture 
the true, unaltered, I/O profile of the actual application traffic, detecting application performance slowdowns and 
transmission  errors  by  measuring  every  SCSI  I/O  transaction  from  start  to  finish. The  SAN  Performance  Probe 
Family consists of an 8 link entry-level device, a high-density 16 link model and the latest ultra high-density 48 link 
enterprise edition, all in a 2U footprint. This product family delivers the full range of cost and density options that 
customers require.
 
SANInsight® TAP Patch Panel System
Traffic Access Points (TAPs) provide a passive, fail-safe access point to Fibre Channel network traffic on the TAP’d 
link. This makes the ‘light’ available for real-time performance monitoring, deep problem diagnosis and protocol layer 
failure analysis. TAPs are non-powered, non-mechanical devices that reflect a small portion of the signal through the 
TAP to another port, which provides a copy of the light to upstream, out of band probes. The passive TAP does not 
introduce any latency or overhead, has no impact on application or SAN performance and is integrated with several 
industry-leading Fibre Channel Patch Panel Systems for simple deployment.

7

COST
RISK

CYCLE TIME

PERFORMANCE
AVAILABILITY
UTILIZATION

Delivering on the Promise of Agility 
and Business Alignment 

The move to virtualized and cloud environments can help reduce CAPEX 
growth in servers, but this new paradigm can’t contribute to controlling 
storage CAPEX or OPEX growth in maintenance costs and staff. In addition, 
there’s often a revenue impact of downtime or unacceptable performance, 
which can also impact brand equity and customer satisfaction. If one is 
not vigilant, the net effect of cloud-driven consolidation, migration, and 
new technology roll-outs is increased risk and cycle time, often negating 
the  very  reason  to  move  to  a  cloud  infrastructure  in  the  first  place. 

VirtualWisdom®  accelerates  enterprise  transformation  by  helping 
you  guarantee  the  benefits  of  reduced  capital  expenditures,  lower 
operational  costs,  and  improved  business  agility,  which  is  the 
promise  of  server virtualization  and  migration to  a  private  cloud.  By 
providing  an  end-to-end  view  of  transactions,  VirtualWisdom  cuts 
through  the  haze  of virtualization.  At  the  same  time,  it  reduces  risk 
by guaranteeing superior infrastructure performance, which is critical 
to  application  performance.  The  key  to  maximizing  performance  is 
deploying  instrumentation  technology  that  directly  measures  what 
is  going  on  at  a  deep  granular  level  in  the  transaction  workflow, 
from  the  virtual  machine  all  the  way  to  the  storage  array  LUNs. 

IT  organizations  that  manage  high  levels  of  complexity  in  their  IT 
infrastructures require a sophisticated set of capabilities to diagnose 
and  prevent  application  slowdowns  caused  by  the  infrastructure, 
especially during consolidation or migration. Complexity is driven by 
the  heterogeneity  of  storage  subsystems,  operating  systems,  fabric 
switches, virtualization  platforms,  and the  continued  growth  of  data 
and  bandwidth  utilization.  Data  center  consolidation,  accelerated 
use of server and storage virtualization and the migration to a cloud 
computing  environment  further  complicate  the  IT  Organization’s 
ability  to  manage  and  optimize  performance  and  availability. 

For  IT  Organizations,  VirtualWisdom  provides  very  granular  and 
continuous,  real-time  measurement  capabilities  from  the VM  to  the 
LUN. It enables you to reduce application response time, proactively 
avoid  outages,  and  dramatically 
improve  resource  utilization. 
VirtualWisdom  helps  identify  application  performance  bottlenecks 
in  the  infrastructure  resulting  in  significantly  higher  performance 
and  utilization,  and  delivers  significant  CAPEX  and  OPEX  savings. 
 
For More Information
For more information on Infrastructure Performance Management or 
how VirtualWisdom can benefit your organization, please contact us at 
info@virtualinstruments.com

 

©2013  Virtual Instruments. All rights reserved. Features and specifications are subject to change without notice. VirtualWisdom, Virtual Instruments, SANInsight are trademarks or registered trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries. All other brands, products, or service names are or may be trademarks or servicemarks of, and are used to identify, products or services of their respective owners. 10/13European Headquarters46 New Broad StreetLondon EC2M 1JHPhone: +44 (0) 203-651-5685Corporate Headquarters25 Metro Drive, San Jose, CA 95110 · USAPhone: 408-579-4000Fax: 408-579-4001Asia Pacific Headquarters8 Cross Street Level 28PWC Building, Singapore 048424Phone: +65 6850-7841Salessales@virtualinstruments.comPhone: 888-522-2557Supportsupport@virtualinstruments.com